Chapter 1. Getting Started
Chapter Objectives

          Create a sketch
          Create a file/part
          Create a solid model
          Edit angular and circular shapes
          Draw holes
          Use Sketch tools
          Change units of a part



1-1 Introduction
SolidWorks is a parametric solid modeler that uses dimensions, parameters, and relationships to
define and drive 3D shapes. Solid modelers make it easy to edit and modify parts as they are
constructed. This capability is ideal for creating new designs.
      Parametric modelers use dimensions to drive the shapes. For example, to create a line of a
defined length, a line is first sketched, and then the length dimension is added. The line will
assume the length of the dimension. If the dimension is changed, the length of the line will
change to match the new dimension.
      When using non-parametric modelers, a line is drawn and a dimension added. The
dimension will define the length of the existing line but not drive it. If the length of the line is
changed, the dimensions will not change. A new dimension is required to define the length of the
line.
      This chapter will show you how to start a New document and introduce the Line, Circle,
and Edit tools. The Smart Dimension tool will be used to define and edit lines and circles. Line
colors and relationships will also be introduced.

1-2 Starting a New Document
Figure 1-1 shows the initial SolidWorks screen.
Figure 1-1


Starting a New Part Document
      1 Click the New tool icon at the top of the SolidWorks screen.
    The New SolidWorks Document dialog box appears, as shown on the left in Figure 1-2.
This is the Novice version of the dialog box. Clicking Advanced opens the Advanced version,
shown on the right. Either version can be used to create three types of documents: Part,
Assembly, and Drawing.
Figure 1-2

       Parts are 3D solid models of individual parts.
       Assemblies are used to create combinations of parts and assemblies.
       Drawings are used to create orthographic views of a Part or Assembly. Dimensions and
       tolerances can be applied to Drawings.
      2 Click the Part tool and then click the OK box.
     The Part screen will appear. See Figure 1-3. Note the different areas of the screen. The
Sketch tab is currently activated, so the Features tools are displayed. Each tool icon on the
Sketch toolbar is accompanied by its name. These names can be removed and the toolbar
condensed to expand the size of the drawing screen. For clarity these named tools will be
included in the first few chapters of the book so you gain enough knowledge of the tools to work
without their names.
Figure 1-3


Selecting a Sketch Plane
SolidWorks uses one of three basic planes to define a part: Front, Top, and Right. These planes
correspond to the planes used to define orthographic views that will be explained in Chapter 4.
The Top plane will be used as a sketch plane to demonstrate the first few tools.
        1 Define the plane on which the part will be created by clicking the Top Plane option in
          the Feature manager box on the left side of the drawing screen.


 Note
 Instruction numbering in the text and figures does not necessarily match; however, the order will be similar. Steps numbered
 in the figures generally pertain to clicking items in the SolidWorks user interface, whereas the text may include additional
 numbered steps to guide the developmental process. The numbering in the figures will generally start anew in each new
 figure.


     See Figure 1-4. An outline of the Top plane will appear using a type of 3D orientation 5
called the Trimetric orientation.
Figure 1-4

      2 Click the Sketch tool as shown in Figure 1-4.
     The Top plane’s orientation will change to a 2D view. The Top plane is now a sketch plane
and appears as a rectangle because the view is taken perpendicular to the plane. This means that
all 2D shapes drawn on the plane will appear as true shapes.
      3 Click the Line tool.
          With the Line tool activated, locate the cursor on the origin. The origin is indicated by
          the two red arrows spaced 90° apart. See Figure 1-5.
Figure 1-5

     Two icons will appear on the screen: the Line tool icon indicating that the Line tool is
active, and the Coincident relation icon indicating that the origin and the starting point for the
line are on the same point.
       4 Move the cursor away from the origin horizontally to the right.
    As you move the cursor away from the origin, a distance and angle value will appear. See
Figure 1-6. The distance is as measured from the origin or starting point for the line, and the
angle is based on the SolidWorks definition of 0° as a horizontal line to the left of the starting
point. We are drawing to the right, so the angular value is 180°.
Figure 1-6

    Two other icons will also appear: the Line tool icon and the horizontal relationship icon.
      5 Click the mouse at the point at which you want to define the endpoint of the line.
      6 Move the cursor vertically downwards. Do not click the mouse.
     A new line will be drawn using the endpoint of the horizontal line as the starting point for
the vertical line. Distance and angle values will appear based on the new starting point, and the
Line and vertical relationship icons will appear.
      7 Press the <Esc> key or right-click the mouse and click the Select option.
      8 Click the Smart Dimension tool, click the line, and move the cursor away from the
        line.
          A dimension will appear.
      9 Click the mouse to define the location of the dimension.
    The Modify dialog box will appear.
     10 Enter a distance value for the line and click the green OK check mark.
     11 Click anywhere on the empty screen to complete the line.
    The dimension can be moved by locating the cursor on the dimension, pressing and holding
the mouse button, and dragging the cursor.
     12 Hover over the arrow next to the SolidWorks logo in the upper left and click the File
        menu located at the top of the screen, then click Close. See Figure 1-7.




Figure 1-7

     13 Click the Don’t Save option. See Figure 1-8.
Figure 1-8

    The screen will return to the original SolidWorks screen.

1-3 SolidWorks Colors
As you work with SolidWorks you will notice that the lines change colors. These color changes
let you know the status of the sketch being drawn. There are four basic colors.
     Black = Fully defined
     Blue = Under defined
     Red = Over defined
     Yellow = Redundant

1-4 Creating a Fully Defined Circle
In this section we will sketch a circle to help understand the difference between a fully defined
and an under defined Part.
      1 In the New SolidWorks dialog box (previously shown in Figure 1-2), click Part and
          then click OK to open a new Part document.
       2 Click the Top Plane on the left (as depicted in Figure 1-4).
       3 Click the Sketch tab. (It may already be activated.) See Figure 1-9.




Figure 1-9

       4 Click the Circle tool.
       5 Locate the cursor on the origin, click the mouse, and drag the cursor away from the
         origin centerpoint.
    Note that the Coincident relation symbol appears next to the origin, indicating that the
centerpoint of the circle is located on the origin.
       6 Click the mouse to define a sketch radius for the circle.
     This sketched radius is a temporary radius and is not the final radius. The circle will be blue,
indicating that it is not fully defined.
       7 Click the Smart Dimension tool on the Sketch panel.
       8 Click the circle and move the cursor away from the circle.
    A dimension will appear. See Figure 1-10.




Figure 1-10

       9 Select a location for the dimension and click the mouse.
     The circle will initially be blue, not fully defined, until the mouse is clicked, locating the
circle’s dimension. When the mouse is clicked, the circle will turn black; it is now fully defined.
We know the circle’s diameter and location.
     When the mouse is clicked, the Modify dialog box will appear. The sketched diameter value
will be listed in the box. This sketched diameter value is now the circle’s diameter until we enter
a new value.
      10 Enter a diameter value for the circle.
    In this example a value of 2.00 was entered.
      11 Click the green OK check mark in the Modify dialog box to enter the diameter value.
      12 Click the green OK check mark in the PropertyManager area to finish defining the
         circle.
Changing an Existing Dimension
      1 Double-click the 2.00 dimension.
    The Modify dialog box will reappear.
      2 Enter a new value.
    In this example a value of 3.00 was entered. See Figure 1-11. The circle’s diameter will
change to 3.00 and the circle’s color will remain black. The circle is still fully defined.
Figure 1-11

       3 Click the green OK check mark in the Modify dialog box.
    Note that the words Fully Defined appear at the bottom of the screen.
    The circle is fully defined because both its diameter and location are known. The location
was fully defined when we located the circle’s centerpoint on the origin. Every circle needs a
locational value and a diameter value to be fully defined. The locational value may be linear (an
X and Y component value) or polar (an angular and radius value).


Fully Defined Entities
To help understand when an entity is fully defined, sketch two circles, one with its centerpoint on
the origin and the other with its centerpoint not on the origin. See Figure 1-12. Both circles are
under defined because the diameter values have not been defined. Both circles are sketched
circles.
Figure 1-12

     Use the Smart Dimension tool and define both their diameters as Ø2.00. The circle located
on the origin will be black. It is fully defined. Both its diameter and location are known. The
circle with its centerpoint not located on the origin will remain blue. It is not fully defined. Its
location is unknown. See Figure 1-13.
Figure 1-13

     Figure 1-14 shows the two Ø2.00 circles again. This time, dimensions have been added to
the circle not located on the origin. The dimensions define the circle’s centerpoint relative to the
origin. It is now fully defined. Its color will change to black.
Figure 1-14


 Note
 Always include the origin as part of a 2D sketch.



     Figure 1-15 shows the two Ø2.00 circles with an extra dimension. The 1.20 vertical
dimension is not needed to define the location of the hole not centered on the origin. A 1.20
vertical dimension already exists. The 1.20 dimension is redundant, so the dimension lines
change to yellow.
Figure 1-15

    Figure 1-15 also shows the Make Dimension Driven? dialog box. A driving dimension
drives the shape and/or location of the object. If the driving dimension is changed, the shape or
location will change. Driven dimensions are reference dimensions. They are sometimes added to
a drawing for clarity. For example, a reference dimension could be used to show the overall
value of a string of smaller dimensions. See Chapter 7. In this example it would be better to
delete the extra 1.20 dimension. If you save it on the sketch, click the Make this dimension
driven option and click OK. It will appear as a gray color. See Figure 1-16.
Figure 1-16

1-5 Units
This book will present examples and exercise problems using English units (inches) and Metric
units (millimeters). Figure 1-17 shows the dimensioned circles created in the previous section.
Note the letters IPS to the right of the Fully Defined callout. IPS stands for inch, pound, and
second, the current units.
Figure 1-17


Changing Units
        1 Click the IPS callout at the bottom of the screen.
        2 Select the desired units.
     In this example millimeters (MMGS) was selected. MMGS stands for millimeter, gram, and
second. The letters MMGS appear at the bottom right of the screen, indicating the drawing units
are now millimeters.
        3 Click the Undo tool to return to the sketch. The new dimensions appear.


 Note
 The converted millimeter dimensions are not whole numbers as were the inch units. It is better to do a drawing in either inches
 or millimeters from the beginning and not to convert units as a drawing is created. This helps prevent round-off errors.




1-6 Rectangle
Rectangles are sketch tools that expedite the creation of rectangles and parallelograms. Each of
these tools can be used to generate four connected lines with appropriate relations rather than
drawing each line individually.


Sketching a Rectangle
The example shown in Figure 1-18 was created on the Top plane using the Rectangle tool. The
units are inches.
Figure 1-18

      1 Open a new Part document, click the Top Plane option, and click the Sketch tool.
    As shown in Figure 1-18, the outline rectangle for the Top plane will rotate to the Normal
orientation; that is, you are looking at the plane from a 90° orientation. This means that any
shape drawn on the plane will be a true shaped line. This concept will be covered in Chapter 4 on
orthographic views.
      2 Click the arrowhead next to the Rectangle tool and select the Corner Rectangle
        option.
    Five options for drawing a rectangle are listed. The different options are helpful when
creating designs. It is recommended you take a few minutes and try each option. Only Corner
Rectangle will be used in this chapter.
      3 Click the origin and move the cursor up and to the right.
      4 Click the mouse to define the rectangle’s opposite corner.
      5 Press the <Esc> key or right-click the mouse and click the Select option.
    Note that two relationships are defined: coincident and horizontal. The starting point was
located on the origin, so they are coincident and the rectangle is drawn. Note also that the
rectangle is not fully defined because its size has not been defined.
     Releasing the mouse button will define the length of the sketched line, but you are still in the
Sketch mode. If you click the mouse again, a new rectangle will begin.
       6 Click the Smart Dimension tool and use it (as previously described) to define the size
         of the rectangle.


Exiting the Sketch Mode
Click the Exit Sketch icon on the Sketch panel or click the Exit Sketch icon that appears in the
upper-right corner of the drawing screen.
    See Figure 1-19.




Figure 1-19


Reentering the Sketch Mode
Once you have created a sketch and left the Sketch mode, you can return to work on the sketch
by using the Edit Sketch mode. See Figure 1-20.
      1 Click an entity in the existing sketch.
      2 Click the Edit Sketch tool.




Figure 1-20

1-7 Moving Around the Drawing Screen
SolidWorks includes several methods that allow you to move entities around the screen. Entities
can be moved, zoomed, or reorientated. Figure 1-21 shows the rectangle created in the previous
section.
Figure 1-21


Zooming the Rectangle
Rotate the mouse wheel. The rectangle will increase and decrease in size.


Moving the Rectangle
      1 Hold down the <Ctrl> key; press and hold down the mouse wheel.
      2 Move the mouse around.
          The rectangle will follow the mouse movement.


Reorientating the Rectangle
      1 Click the rectangle.
      2 Hold down the mouse wheel and move the mouse.
    The rectangle’s orientation will follow the mouse movement.

1-8 Orientation
The rectangle in the previous sections was created in the Top view orientation. As you work on a
sketch, the orientation may change. There are three techniques you can use to return the sketch to
its original orientation.


Returning to the Top View Orientation—View Selector
       1 Click the View Orientation tool at the top of the drawing screen.
   The View Selector cube will appear. See Figure 1-22. If the cube does not appear, click the
View Selector icon on the View Orientation tool panel.
Figure 1-22

      2 Click the top surface of the View Selector cube.
    The sketch will return to the Top view orientation.


Returning to the Top View Orientation—Top View
See Figure 1-22.
      1 Click the View Orientation tool at the top of the drawing screen.
      2 Click the Top view tool.


Returning to the Top View Orientation—Orientation Triad
The Orientation Triad is located in the lower-left corner of the drawing screen. See Figure 1-
22.
    SolidWorks defines the Top plane as the XZ plane. The Y axis is 90° to the XZ plane, so a
view taken along the Y axis will generate a top view of the plane.
      1 Move the cursor onto the Orientation Triad.
      2 Click the Y axis indicator arrow.
          The triad will reorientate to the Top view orientation.

1-9 Sample Problem SP1-1
Figure 1-23 shows a 2D shape sketched using the Line tool. The dimensions are in millimeters.
This section will explain how to draw the shape.




Figure 1-23

      1 Start a New Part document, select the Front Plane, and click the Sketch tool to create
        a sketch plane.
    See Figure 1-24.
Figure 1-24

      2 Define the dimensional units as millimeters, MMGS.
   See Figure 1-25.
Figure 1-25

       3 Click the Line tool.
       4 Select the origin as the starting point for the first line.


Note
The Line tool will generate a series of chain lines, where the endpoint of a sketched line becomes the starting point for the
next line, until the line’s endpoint is defined by pressing the <Esc> key or right-clicking the mouse and clicking the Select
option.


       5 Sketch the general shape as shown in Figure 1-26.
Figure 1-26

 Hint
 Make each line slightly larger than the stated dimension. Exact values are not required. Use the real-time length values to
 estimate the length of the longer lines.



     Note the double-circle relation icon that appears when the end of the last horizontal line
drawn is located on the starting point of the first line. This is the Concentric relation icon, which
indicates that the two points occupy the same location. The midpoint of the right-side vertical
line is also defined.
        6 Click the Smart Dimension tool and dimension the shape as shown in Figure 1-27 by
          clicking each line and entering the given dimensional value.
Figure 1-27

     SolidWorks is sensitive to how the dimensions are entered. See Figure 1-27. Note that when
the vertical 40 dimension was added to the right side of the shape, the adjacent horizontal 40 line
moved upwards. This means that the two horizontal 40 lines are no longer aligned. The right
horizontal 40 line must be fixed in place so that it remains aligned with the other horizontal 40
line when the vertical 40 dimension is added. The vertical 40 dimension will then move the
bottom of the slot downwards.


Fixing a Line in Place
       1 Use the Undo tool to remove the vertical 40 dimension.
       2 Click the right horizontal 40 line as shown in Figure 1-28.
Figure 1-28

       3 Click the Make Fixed tool.
    The Make Fixed tool’s icon is an anchor. When the Make Fixed tool is activated, an anchor
icon will appear below the line.
       4 Use the Smart Dimension tool and add a vertical 40 dimension as shown.
    The horizontal line at the bottom of the slot will move, accepting the 40 dimensional
changes. The two horizontal lines remain aligned.


Sketch Relations
Sketch Relations are relationships shared between entities that help maintain the design intent of
the sketch. The coincident relation was used previously in Figure 1-5 to align the starting point
of a line with the origin. This relation ensures that the start point is always at the origin, even if
the line’s length changes. Figure 1-29 shows a view of the object with Sketch Relations.
Figure 1-29

     To remove the Sketch Relations icon:
        1 Click the View tab at the top of the screen.
        2 Click the Hide/Show option.
        3 Click the Sketch Relations option.


 Note
 2D shapes should always be fully defined before creating 3D models.




1-10 Creating 3D Models
The fully defined shape shown in Figure 1-28 can now be used to create a 3D model.


Creating a 3D Model
      1 Select the sketch.
      2 Click the Features tab.
      3 Click the Extruded Boss/Base tool.
    See Figure 1-30. The shape will change orientation to the Trimetric orientation. The sketch
was created on the Front plane.
Figure 1-30

      4 Define the depth as 20mm.
      5 Click the green OK check mark.
      6 Click the drawing screen.

1-11 Saving Documents
See Figure 1-31.
Figure 1-31


Saving a Document
      1 Click the File menu at the top of the drawing screen. You might have to hover over the
        SolidWorks logo if the File menu is not visible.
   A drop-down menu will appear.
      2 Click the Save As option.
   The Save As dialog box will appear. See Figure 1-32.
Figure 1-32

      3 Enter the name of the document in the File name field.
    In this example the name BLOCK was used.
      4 Click the Save button.

1-12 Sample Problem SP1-2
Figure 1-33 shows a 2D shape that includes two angles. The dimensions are in inches. This
section will show how to create the shape.
Figure 1-33

       1 Click the Sketch tab, click the Front Plane option, and then click the Sketch tool.
    See Figure 1-34.
       2 Use the Line tool and sketch the approximate shape.
    Start the first line of the shape on the origin. Sketch the shape slightly larger than the final
shape.
       3 Add dimensions to the shape. See Figure 1-34.
       4 Click the left vertical line and the left angled line and move the cursor away from the
         shape to create an angular dimension.
       5 Select a location for the dimension and click the mouse.
       6 In the Modify dialog box that opens, enter the angle value.
Figure 1-34

   In this example the value is 30°.
      7 Click the green OK check mark to close the Modify dialog box.
      8 Complete the remaining dimensions as shown in Figure 1-34.
      9 Ensure that the shape is fully defined.
     10 Click the Features tab, click the Extruded Boss/Base tool, and define the depth. See
        Figure 1-35.
Figure 1-35

      In this example, a depth of 0.50in. was entered.
       11 Click the green OK check mark and then click the drawing screen.
      All the lines in the shape should be black, indicating the shape is fully defined. See Figure 1-
36.
Figure 1-36

1-13 Holes
There are several different ways to create holes using SolidWorks. Most holes are created using
the Hole Wizard tool, which is explained in Chapter 3. For purposes of this introductory
chapter, holes will be created using the Circle and Extruded Cut tools. A circle will be created
and then cut through the 3D shape. All holes will be simple through holes; that is, they will go
completely through the shape.


Creating a Hole
Figure 1-37 shows the 3D shape created in Sample Problem SP1-1. Two Ø20.0 holes have been
added.
Figure 1-37

      1 Click the File menu at the top of the screen and click the Open option, or click the
        Open tool.
      2 Locate and click the BLOCK file created and saved in the last section.
    See Figure 1-38. In this example the file was located on the C: drive in the folder
SolidWorks 2023.
Figure 1-38

      3 Click Open.
   The BLOCK will appear on the screen. See Figure 1-39.
Figure 1-39

      4 Click the View Orientation tool and select the Normal To option.
    This will create a view from an orientation point 90° to the surface. This is called a normal
view. See Figure 1-40.
Figure 1-40

   For this exercise we will work in a three-dimensional isometric plane. See Figure 1-41.
Figure 1-41

      5 Again click the View Orientation tool, but this time select the small hexagonal surface
        to orient to Isometric.
      6 Create a sketch plane on the front surface of the BLOCK, then use the Circle tool and
        add two circles using the given dimensions.
      7 Click the Features tab and click the Extruded Cut tool.
      8 Set the cut depth for 20.00mm.
     The Extruded Cut tool should automatically select the two circles. If it does not, click the
circles. A preview should appear.
      9 Click the green OK check mark.
     10 Click the drawing screen.
    The holes should appear in the shape.

Chapter Project
Project 1-1
Sketch the shapes shown in Figures P1-1 through P1-18. Create 3D models using the specified
thickness values.
Figure P1-1
INCHES
Figure P1-2
INCHES
Figure P1-3
INCHES
Figure P1-4
INCHES
Figure P1-5
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-6
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-7
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-8
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-9
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-10
INCHES
Figure P1-11
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-12
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-13
INCHES
Figure P1-14
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-15
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-16
INCHES
Figure P1-17
MILLIMETERS
Figure P1-18
MILLIMETERS
