Chapter 2. Sketch Entities and Tools
Chapter Objectives

         Create 2D sketches
         Use most of the sketch tools
         Create more complex shapes by combining individual sketch tools



2-1 Introduction
Chapter 2 explains and demonstrates the tools on the Sketch panel, shown in Figure 2-1. Most of
the sketch tools are initially explained and demonstrated individually. They are then combined in
Sample Problems to show how they can be used together to create more complicated sketches.




Figure 2-1

     Most of the sections include only one tool so that you can reference them at a later time if
you need a refresher. The Line tool was covered in Chapter 1.
     The Circle and Rectangle tools are presented in reference to an origin to create fully
defined parts. However, many times sketches are added into an existing part that is already fully
defined and referenced to the origin. The added sketches are referenced to the existing part to
create fully defined parts. Many of the Sketching tools will be presented without reference to an
origin.

2-2 Mouse Gestures and the S Key
As you work with SolidWorks you may find yourself constantly using the same sketching tools
repeatedly. The Mouse Gestures and S Key tools can be customized to help speed up the
application of repetitive tools.


Mouse Gestures
Mouse Gestures is a SolidWorks feature that enables you to work faster. Selective commands,
those you use most often, are linked to the movement of the mouse so that you can activate these
commands by simply moving the mouse.
     Figure 2-2 shows the default Mouse Gestures settings for the Part commands. Four tools
are shown on the wheel: Smart Dimension, Circle, Line, and Corner Rectangle. These are the
default tools settings. Up to eight tools can be added to the mouse gestures wheel.
Figure 2-2

     Mouse Gestures and Mouse Gestures options are different for each drawing mode. The
tools listed in the Drawing and Assembly modes will be used when these subjects are
introduced later in the book.


Using Mouse Gestures
Say you want to activate the Line tool and the default settings are in place.
      11 Press and hold the right mouse button.
      12 Move the mouse slightly to the left.
      13 Still holding the right mouse button down, move the cursor onto the Line tool.
    The selected tool will activate.


Accessing Mouse Gestures Settings
       1 Click the Tools menu at the top of the screen.
      2 Click the Customize option.
    See Figure 2-3. The Customize dialog box will appear.




Figure 2-3

      3 Click the Mouse Gestures tab.
    A listing of available tools will appear. If you select 8 Gestures in the drop-down menu, the
eight default mouse gestures settings will appear. See Figure 2-4.
Figure 2-4


Adding a Tool to a Mouse Gestures Wheel
      1 Click and hold the left mouse button on the tool you want to move onto a wheel.
      2 95Drag the tool’s icon onto the wheel.
      3 Release the mouse button.
   Figure 2-5 shows the new tool replacing the default tool on the wheel.
Figure 2-5

    Figure 2-6 shows the Mouse Gestures wheel used to create Part documents. Figure 2-7
shows a sample Mouse Gestures wheel next to a sketch.
Figure 2-6
Figure 2-7


 Note
 When you assign a new tool to a Mouse Gestures wheel, the existing tool will be replaced—that is, it is no longer available.
 If you want the removed tool on the Mouse Gestures wheel, you must re-enter it in a different location.




S Key
Another SolidWorks tool that helps to increase your working speed is the S Key option. The tools
listed in the S Key dialog box may be customized. For this chapter we will show the Sketching
S Key. Other S Key tool listings will be shown as the different modes are explained. S Key tools
can be customized to your personal preference.


Activating the S Key
See Figure 2-8.
Figure 2-8

      1 While in a sketch, press the S key on the keyboard.
   The S Key toolbar will appear.
      2 Click the desired tool.
   In this example the Line tool was activated. See Figure 2-9.
Figure 2-9


Customizing the S Key Shortcut Toolbar
      1 Press the S key on the keyboard.
      2 Right-click the S Key toolbar.
   See Figure 2-10.
Figure 2-10

      3 Click the Customize . . . callout.
   The Customize dialog box will appear. See Figure 2-11.
Figure 2-11

      4 Click the tool to be added from the Buttons panel, drag the icon to the Sketch
        Shortcuts toolbar panel, and release the mouse button.
      5 Click OK.
   The tool icon will appear in the box. See Figure 2-12.
Figure 2-12


Removing a Tool from the S Key Toolbar
       1 Click and drag the selected tool out and away from the toolbar. See Figure 2-12
         (bottom).
       2 Release the mouse button.
       3 Click OK.

2-3 Origins
All sketches must be referenced to the drawing’s origin in order to be fully defined. See Section
1-4 in Chapter 1. The easiest way to create a fully defined sketch is to start it on the origin. The
drawing’s origin may not always be visible.


Showing the Origin
       1 Click the View menu at the top of the drawing screen.
       2 Click the Hide/Show option, and click the Origins tool.
     See Figure 2-13. The icon next to the Origins tool heading will become shaded when the
tool is on.




Figure 2-13

   The drawing’s origin icon will appear on the screen. It will remain visible on the screen until
removed by clicking the shaded tool heading created when the Origins tool was turned on.

2-4 Circle
A circle is sketched using the Circle tool and then sized (that is, given a diameter value) using
the Smart Dimension tool. There are two circle tools: Circle and Perimeter Circle.


Sketching a Circle
       1 Click the New tool icon at the top of the screen, click the Part tool in the New
         SolidWorks Document dialog box, and click OK.
    See Figure 2-14. The dimensions will be in inches.
Figure 2-14

      2 Click the Front Plane tool in the FeatureManager Design Tree.
    A small toolbar will appear.
      3 Click the Sketch tool.
     The circle will be created on the Front plane in the Sketch mode. See Figure 2-15. Note that
the origin is displayed in the center of the Front plane.
Figure 2-15

      4 Click the Circle tool.
      5 Select the origin as the circle’s centerpoint by clicking the origin and dragging the
        cursor away from the centerpoint.
      6 Click an approximate edge point for the circle.
      7 Click the Smart Dimension tool, click the circle, and define the circle’s diameter. See
        Figure 2-16.
Figure 2-16

      8 Right-click the mouse and click the Select option.
    For this example a diameter of Ø2.50 was selected. The circle is black, meaning it is fully
defined. The Orientation Triad in the lower-left corner of the screen shows the XY or Front
plane orientation.


Sketching a Perimeter Circle Using Three Points
A perimeter circle is a circle drawn using three points. These points may be three individual
points or points tangent to an existing object.
      1 Create a new Part document.
      2 Click the Top Plane tool in the FeatureManager Design Tree.
      3 Click the Sketch tool.
      4 Set the Units for millimeters.
      5 Click the Perimeter Circle tool.
   The Perimeter Circle tool is a flyout from the Circle tool. See Figure 2-17.




Figure 2-17

      6 Click three points on the screen.
   Make one of the points coincidental with the origin. See Figure 2-18.
      7 Click the circle to select it.
Figure 2-18


Sketching a Perimeter Circle Tangent to Three Lines
Figure 2-19 shows three randomly drawn straight lines. Draw a circle tangent to each line.
      1 Click the Perimeter Circle tool.
      2 Click the approximate midpoint of each of the three lines.
Figure 2-19

     A circle will appear tangent to all three lines.
     When the Sketch Relations are shown, you can see that the circle is tangent to each of the
lines. See Figure 2-20.
Figure 2-20

2-5 Rectangle
There are five different methods that can be used to create a rectangle, including the Corner
Rectangle tool explained in Chapter 1. This section will describe how to sketch a rectangle using
the other four methods.


Sketching a Center Rectangle
      1 Create a New Part document.
      2 Click the Top Plane option.
      3 Click the Sketch tool.
      4 Set the Units for inches.
      5 Click the Center Rectangle tool.
    The Center Rectangle tool is a flyout from the Rectangle tool icon. See Figure 2-21.
Figure 2-21

      6 Select the origin for the first corner point.
      7 Move the cursor and select the second corner point, right-click the mouse, and click the
        Select option.
      8 Click the Smart Dimension tool and add dimensions to the rectangle.
      9 Right-click the mouse and click the Select option.
   The rectangle is fully defined. See Figure 2-22.
Figure 2-22


Sketching a 3 Point Corner Rectangle
        1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
          inches.
        2 Click the 3 Point Corner Rectangle tool.
      The 3 Point Corner Rectangle tool is a flyout from the Rectangle tool icon. See Figure 2-
23.
Figure 2-23

      3 Locate the first point on the origin.
      4 Move the cursor horizontally and define a second point.
      5 Move the cursor vertically and define a third point.
      6 Use the Smart Dimension tool and define the rectangle’s size.
   See Figure 2-24.
Figure 2-24


Sketching a 3 Point Center Rectangle
      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        inches.
      2 Click the 3 Point Center Rectangle tool.
   The 3 Point Center Rectangle tool is a flyout from the Rectangle tool icon.
      3 Locate the first point on the origin.
      4 Move the cursor horizontally to the right and define a second point.
      5 Move the cursor vertically and define a third point.
   See Figure 2-25.
Figure 2-25

      6 Use the Smart Dimension tool and define the rectangle’s size.


Sketching a Parallelogram
      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        inches.
      2 Click the Parallelogram tool.
   The Parallelogram tool is a flyout from the Rectangle tool icon. See Figure 2-26.
Figure 2-26

       3 Locate the first point on the origin.
       4 Move the cursor horizontally and to the right and define a second point.
       5 Move the cursor vertically and at an angle and define a third point.
     Note that a parallelogram has four sides that are parallel and equal in length, but also
includes an angle other than 90° between sides.
       6 Use the Smart Dimension tool and define the rectangle’s size.

2-6 Slots
SolidWorks has four different tools that can be used to draw slots. See Figure 2-27.
Figure 2-27

    The Straight Slot tool can be used to draw both internal and external slot shapes. Figure 2-
28 shows examples of both internal and external slot shapes.
Figure 2-28


Sketching a Straight Slot
See Figure 2-29.
Figure 2-29

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the Straight Slot tool and the Center to Center option.
      3 Click a starting point.
     In this example the origin was selected.
      4 Move the cursor horizontally and define a second point.
     The distance between points 1 and 2 will define the slot’s centerline.
      5 Move the cursor and select a third point.
    The distance between points 2 and 3 will define the radius of the slot’s rounded ends.
      6 Add dimensions as required to fully define the shape.


Sketching a Centerpoint Straight Slot
See Figure 2-30.
Figure 2-30

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the Centerpoint Straight Slot tool.
      3 Click a starting point.
      4 Move the cursor horizontally and define a second point.
      5 Move the cursor and select a third point.
      6 Add dimensions as required to fully define the shape.


Sketching a 3 Point Arc Slot
See Figure 2-31.
Figure 2-31

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the 3 Point Arc Slot tool.
      3 Click a starting point.
      4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
      5 Move the cursor and define point 3.
     The angular distance between points 1 and 2 will define the angular length of the arc. The
distance between point 3 and the arc’s centerpoint will define the arc’s radius.
      6 Move the cursor and define point 4.
    The distance between points 3 and 4 will define the radius for the slot’s rounded ends.
      7 Add dimensions as required.


Sketching a Centerpoint Arc Slot
See Figure 2-32.
Figure 2-32

       1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
         inches.
       2 Click the Centerpoint Arc Slot tool.
       3 Click a starting point.
       4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
     The distance between the starting point, point 1, and point 2 will define the radius of a circle.
The circle will be used to define the arc. The radius of the arc will be equal to the radius of the
circle.
       5 Move the cursor and define point 3.
    The angular distance between points 2 and 3 will define the angular length of the arc.
       6 Move the cursor and define point 4.
    The distance between points 3 and 4 will define the radius for the slot’s rounded ends.
       7 Add dimensions as required.
2-7 Perimeter Circle
The Circle tool was presented in Section 1-4 in Chapter 1.
     Perimeter circles are often drawn tangent to existing lines or arcs. Figure 2-33 shows a set of
perpendicular lines and a circle. In this example a perimeter circle will be drawn tangent to the
lines and circle.
Figure 2-33


Sketching a Perimeter Circle
       1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
         inches.
       2 Click the Perimeter Circle tool.
       3 Click a starting point, point 1.
    In this example the horizontal line was selected. Any point on the line is acceptable but it is
good practice to select a point on the line near the approximate location of the tangent point.
       4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
    In this example the vertical line was selected.
       5 Move the cursor and select point 3.
    In this example the circle was selected.
       6 Right-click the mouse and click the Select option.
2-8 Arcs
SolidWorks has three Arc tools: Centerpoint Arc, Tangent Arc, and 3 Point Arc. See Figure
2-34.




Figure 2-34


Sketching a Centerpoint Arc
See Figure 2-35.
Figure 2-35

       1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
         millimeters.
       2 Click the Centerpoint Arc tool.
       3 Click a starting point, point 1.
       4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
     The distance between the starting point, point 1, and point 2 will define the radius of a circle.
The circle will be used to define the arc. The radius of the arc will be equal to the radius of the
circle.
       5 Move the cursor and define point 3.
    The angular distance between points 2 and 3 will define the angular length of the arc.
       6 Add dimensions as required.


Sketching a Tangent Arc
See Figure 2-36. The Tangent Arc is used to draw an arc between existing entities. In this
example two lines have been drawn.
Figure 2-36

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the Tangent Arc tool.
      3 Click a starting point, point 1.
     In this example the endpoint of the slanted line was selected.
      4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
     In this example the endpoint of the horizontal line was selected.
      5 Add dimensions as required.
     The radius of the arc is controlled by the radius dimensional value.
     Figure 2-37 shows two parallel lines. The Tangent Arc tool was used to add a rounded end
segment to the right end. Note that the radius value is 10 or half the distance between the two
lines.
Figure 2-37


Sketching a 3 Point Arc
Three points can be used to define an arc. See Figure 2-38.
Figure 2-38

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the 3 Point Arc tool.
      3 Click a starting point, point 1.
      4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
      5 Move the cursor and define point 3.
      6 Add dimensions as required.

2-9 Polygons
A polygon is any closed plane figure with at least three sides and three angles. SolidWorks draws
regular polygons—that is, polygons with all sides and angles equal. Irregular polygons must be
drawn as individual line segments.


Sketching a Hexagon
A hexagon is a polygon with six sides. For this example a regular hexagon with six equal sides
and angles will be drawn. See Figure 2-39.
Figure 2-39

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the Polygon tool.
      3 Set the Parameters value to 6 and ensure that the Inscribed circle button is active.
        This will create a circumscribed hexagon.
      4 Click a starting point, point 1.
      5 Move the cursor and define point 2.
      6 Add dimensions as required.
    Figure 2-40 shows a circumscribed hexagon and an inscribed hexagon. The circumscribed
hexagon is drawn around and tangent to a circle. An inscribed hexagon is drawn within a circle.
Figure 2-40

2-10 Spline
A spline is a curved line that intersects several defined points. A spline whose starting point is
coincident with its endpoint is called a closed spline. All other splines are open splines. Figure 2-
41 shows examples of open and closed splines.
Figure 2-41


Sketching a Spline
See Figure 2-42.
Figure 2-42

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the Spline tool.
      3 Click a starting point, point 1.
      4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
      5 Move the cursor and define point 3.
      6 Move the cursor and define point 4.
      7 Move the cursor and define point 5.
      8 Press the <Esc> key.
    The points used to create a spline may be defined using dimensions.


Editing a Spline
See Figure 2-43.
Figure 2-43

      1 Select a point on the spline.
      2 Click and drag the point to a new location.
      3 Click the green OK check mark.
    A spline may also be edited by editing the dimensions used to define the spline’s points.

2-11 Ellipse
There are four tools associated with the Ellipse tool: Ellipse, Partial Ellipse, Parabola, and
Conic. See Figure 2-44. For technical drawings an ellipse is defined by its centerpoint location,
its major axis, and its minor axis.
Figure 2-44


Sketching an Ellipse
See Figure 2-45.
Figure 2-45

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the Ellipse tool.
      3 Click a starting point, point 1.
      4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
    The distance between points 1 and 2 defines half the minor axis distance.
      5 Move the cursor and define point 3.
    The distance between points 1 and 3 defines half the major axis distance.
      6 Add dimensions as required.


Sketching a Partial Ellipse
See Figure 2-46.
1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
  millimeters.
2 Click the Partial Ellipse tool.
3 Click a starting point, point 1.
Figure 2-46

       4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
    The distance between points 1 and 2 defines half the minor axis distance.
       5 Move the cursor and define point 3.
    The distance between points 1 and 3 defines half the major axis distance.
       6 Move the cursor to define the partial ellipse.
       7 Add dimensions as necessary.


Sketching a Parabola
A parabola is defined as the path of a moving point that is always equidistant from a fixed point,
the focus, and a fixed straight line, the directrix. See Figure 2-47.
       1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
         millimeters.
       2 Click the Parabola tool.
3 Click a starting point, point 1.
Figure 2-47

    In this example the selected point 1 becomes the focus.
       4 Move the cursor and define point 2.
    The distance between points 1 and 2 defines half the distance to the directrix.
       5 Move the cursor and define a start point for the parabola.
       6 Click and drag the cursor to define the size of the parabola.
       7 Add dimensions as required.
    The distance between the focus and the directrix is two times the distance between the focus
and the closest point of the parabola.


Conic Section
A conic section is the intersection of a plane with a cone. Ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas are
all conic sections. See Figure 2-48.
Figure 2-48


Sketching a Conic
Conic curves can be used to create smooth curves between existing endpoints. See Figure 2-49.
Figure 2-49

      1 Click the Sketch tab to access the Sketching tools, define a plane, and set the units to
        millimeters.
      2 Click the Conic tool.
      3 Ensure that there is a check mark in the Auto tangency box.
      4 Click points 1 and 2.
     A conic curve will appear along with a rho value. The rho value will change as you move
the cursor.
      5 Select an appropriate conic shape, right-click the mouse, and click the Select option.

2-12 Fillets and Chamfers
A fillet is a rounded corner or edge and a chamfer is a beveled corner or edge. Both the Sketch
Fillet and Sketch Chamfer tools can be applied to 2D sketches of 3D models. Figure 2-50
shows a sketch that includes a fillet and a chamfer.
Figure 2-50


Sketching a Fillet
See Figure 2-51.
Figure 2-51

      1 Click the Fillet tool.
      2 Define the radius for the fillet.
      3 Click the left vertical line.
      4 Click the top horizontal line.
    A preview of the fillet will appear.
      5 Add fillets to the other corners of the rectangle.


Sketching a Chamfer
There are three different ways to define a chamfer: angle-distance, distance-distance—equal
distance, and distance-distance—not equal distance. Figure 2-52 shows an existing 3.00 × 5.00
rectangle.
Figure 2-52


Sketching a Chamfer Using Distance-Distance—Equal Distance
See Figure 2-52.
      1 Click the Chamfer tool.
    The Chamfer tool is a flyout from the Fillet tool.
      2 Click the Distance-distance option and check the Equal distance check box.
      3 Define the size of the chamfer.
      4 Click the left vertical line.
      5 Click the top horizontal line.
    A preview of the chamfer will appear.
      6 Add a .75 × .75 chamfer to the other corners.
Sketching a Chamfer Using Angle-Distance
See Figure 2-53.




Figure 2-53

       1 Click the Chamfer tool.
       2 Click the Angle-distance option.
       3 Define the chamfer’s angle and distance.
       4 Click the left vertical line.
       5 Click the top horizontal line.
     A preview of the chamfer will appear. The relative angle of the chamfer will depend on the
line selection sequence. The chamfers at the top of the rectangle selected the vertical sides first
and the chamfers at the bottom of the rectangle selected the bottom horizontal line first.
     Note that an angle-distance chamfer created with a 45° angle will generate two equal
distances.
Sketching a Chamfer Using Distance-Distance—Not Equal
Distance
See Figure 2-54.




Figure 2-54

      1 Click the Chamfer tool.
      2 Click the Distance-distance option and uncheck the Equal distance check box.
      3 Define the two distances.
    The direction of the chamfer depends on the line selection sequence.
      4 Click the lines as shown.

2-13 Sketch Text
The Text tool is used to add text to a sketch. The default font for SolidWorks text is Century
Gothic.
Adding Text
See Figure 2-55.




Figure 2-55

      1 Click the Text tool.
      2 Type the text in the Text box in the Sketch Text manager box.
     The Text box text will appear on the screen. The text can be moved by clicking the cursor in
a different location.


Changing the Font and Size of Text
See Figure 2-56.
Figure 2-56

       1 Remove the check mark from the Use document font box and click the Font button.
    The Choose Font dialog box will appear.
       2 Define the new font and text height.
       3 Click OK.
       4 Add the text.
       5 Click the green OK check mark.
    In this example Arial Bold font with a height of 0.375in was selected.


Adding Text to a Feature
The Text tool will automatically place text at the origin if no feature is selected. The Text tool
can also attach text to a defined existing feature as shown in Figure 2-57, where text is added to a
line on a rectangle.
Figure 2-57

       1 Draw a rectangle.
       2 Click the Text tool.
       3 Click the top line of the rectangle.
       4 Type the text in the Text box in the Sketch Text manager box.
       5 Click the green OK check mark.


Creating Text that Wraps Around Two Features
Text can also be added to two features at once.
       1 Draw a rectangle.
       2 Click the Text tool.
       3 Define two of the lines in the rectangle shown as features to attach the text.
       4 Type the text.
       5 Click the green OK check mark.
2-14 Point
The Point tool is used to create points anywhere on the drawing screen. Points are often helpful
during the construction process of a sketch. Figure 2-58 shows a point. It was created by clicking
the Point tool and selecting a location on the drawing screen. The point can be precisely located
using dimensions, by using the Control Vertex Parameters values listed in the Point manager
box, or by attaching the point to an existing entity.




Figure 2-58

2-15 Trim Entities
The Trim Entities tool is used to remove unwanted entities from an existing sketch. Figure 2-59
shows a line passing through a circle and a rectangle. Say we wish to remove the portions of the
line that pass through the circle and the rectangle.
Figure 2-59


Trimming Entities
      1 Click the Trim Entities tool. If not already selected, click the Trim to closest option.
      2 Locate the cursor on the portion of the line within the circle.
      3 Click the mouse.
    The line segment will be removed.
      4 Locate the cursor on the portion of the line that passes through the rectangle and click
        the mouse.

2-16 Extend Entities
The Extend Entities tool is on the flyout from the Trim Entities tool and is used to extend
existing lines to new lengths.
     Figure 2-60 shows an existing 1.75 × 4.00 rectangle. We wish to extend the horizontal
length to 6.00.
Figure 2-60


Extending Entities in a Sketch
      1 Sketch a vertical line about 6.00 from the left vertical line of the rectangle.
      2 Use the Smart Dimension tool and define the location of the line as 6.00.
      3 Click the Extend Entities tool.
    The cursor will appear with the Extend Entities icon attached.
      4 Click the top horizontal line.
     The line will extend to the vertical line located at 6.00 from the left vertical edge of the
rectangle.
      5 Click the lower horizontal line.
      6 Click the Trim Entities tool, select the Trim to closest option, and, using the top and
        bottom horizontal lines as bounding lines, trim the 4.00 line.
    Note that the dimension also is removed.

2-17 Offset Entities
The Offset Entities tool is used to sketch entities parallel to an existing entity. Figure 2-61
shows a line. Say we wish to draw a line parallel to the existing line .75 away.
Figure 2-61


Sketching an Offset Line
          1 Sketch a line.
          2 Click the Offset Entities tool.
          3 Specify the offset distance.
          4 Click the existing line.
        A preview will appear. In this example the offset line is initially located below the original
line.
          5 Click a location above the existing line.
          6 Click the green OK check mark.
        The Offset Entities tool can be used to offset existing enclosed shapes. See Figure 2-62.
Figure 2-62

2-18 Mirror Entities
The Mirror Entities tool is used to create mirror images of entities. A mirror image is different
from a copy. Figure 2-63 shows both a mirror image and a copy of the same shape. Note the
differences.
Figure 2-63


Creating a Mirror Entity
Figure 2-64 shows a circular shaped entity that includes a circular cutout.
       1 Click the Mirror Entities tool.
       2 Select all the curves and lines in the entity excluding the Mirror Line.
Figure 2-64

    A list will appear in the Entities to mirror box. In this example, Line1, Arc3, Arc2, and
Arc1 were selected.
      3 Click the Mirror about box.
      4 Click the mirror line. In this example, Line2 was selected.
    A preview of the mirrored image will appear.
      5 Click the green OK check mark.
    A line within the entity can be used as a mirror line. Figure 2-65 shows an entity mirrored
about one of its edge lines.
Figure 2-65

2-19 Linear Sketch Pattern
The Linear Sketch Pattern tool is used to create patterns of sketched entities in the X and Y
directions. Both linear and circular patterns can also be created from 3D models.
     Figure 2-66 shows an entity. Say we wish to create a 3 × 5 linear pattern of the entity.
Figure 2-66


Creating a Linear Sketch Pattern
      1 Click the Linear Sketch Pattern tool.
      2 Click all the lines in the entity.
      3 Ensure that Direction 1 is the X-axis.
    The box will have a blue background.
      4 Set the spacing distance for 2in.
    The 2.00 spacing distance is derived from the shapes’ 1.50 width plus .50 clearance between
each object in the X-direction.
      5 Set the number of instances to 3.
      6 Click the Y-axis box.
      7 Set the spacing distance for 1.5.
    The 1.50 spacing distance is derived from the shapes’ 1.00 height plus .50 clearance
between each object in the Y-direction.
      8 Set the number of instances to 5.
    A preview will appear.
      9 Click the green OK check mark.

2-20 Circular Sketch Pattern
The Circular Sketch Pattern tool is used to create circular patterns about a centerpoint. To
demonstrate the Circular Sketch Pattern tool we will create a bolt circle. Figure 2-67 shows a
Ø.75 circle located 2.00 from a fixed centerpoint.
Figure 2-67


Creating a Circular Sketch Pattern
      1 Click the Circular Sketch Pattern tool.
    The Circular Sketch Pattern tool is a flyout from the Linear Sketch Pattern tool.
      2 Define Point-1 as the origin.
      3 Click the edge of the Ø.75 circle.
      4 Set the number of instances in the pattern to 8.
      5 Ensure that the Spacing is 360deg and that the Entities to Pattern contains the
        selected circle.
      6 Click the green OK check mark.

2-21 Move Entities
The Move Entities tool is used to move an entity from one location to another. See Figure 2-68.
Figure 2-68


Moving an Entity
      1 Click the Move Entities tool.
      2 Click all the lines in the entity.
   A listing of the selected lines will appear in the Entities to Move box.
      3 Delete the check from the Keep relations check box.
      4 Click the Start point box.
   It should turn blue, indicating that it is active.
      5 Select a Start point.
   In this example the lower-left corner of the entity was selected.
      6 Click the Start point and move the cursor away from the entity.
   A preview of the entity will follow the cursor.
      7 Select a new location for the entity.
      8 Click the green OK check mark.

2-22 Copy Entities
The Copy Entities tool is used to create a duplication of an existing entity. The existing entity
remains in place as the copy is created. See Figure 2-69.
Figure 2-69


Copying an Entity
      1 Click the Copy Entities tool.
         The Copy Entities tool is a flyout from the Move Entities tool.
      2 Select all the lines in the entity.
      3 Delete the check from the Keep relations check box.
      4 Click the Start point box.
         The Start point box will turn blue when it is active.
      5 Click a selected Start point.
         In this example the lower-left corner was selected.
      6 Move the cursor and select a location for the copy.
         A preview of the copy will move with the cursor.
      7 Click a location for the copy.
    SolidWorks will automatically generate another copy that will move with the cursor.
      8 Click the green OK check mark.

2-23 Rotate Entities
The Rotate Entities tool is used to rotate an existing entity about a defined rotation point. See
Figure 2-70.
Figure 2-70


Rotating an Entity
      1 Click the Rotate Entities tool.
    The Rotate Entities tool is a flyout from the Move Entities tool.
      2 Select all the lines in the entity.
      3 Click the Center of rotation box.
    The box will have a blue background when it is active.
      4 Enter an angular value for the rotation or move the cursor to select a rotation angle.
    SolidWorks defines the counterclockwise direction as the positive angular direction. A
horizontal line to the right is 0.0°. In this example an angle of 30° was selected.
      5 Click the green OK check mark.

2-24 Scale Entities
The Scale Entities tool is used to change the overall size of an entity while maintaining the
proportions of the original entity. The Scale Entities tool includes a Copy option. If the Copy
option is activated when the scaled entity is created, the original entity will be retained. If the
Copy option is off (no check mark) when a scaled entity is made, the original entity will be
deleted.
    See Figure 2-71.
Figure 2-71


Scaling an Entity
      1 Click the Scale Entities tool.
    The Scale Entities tool is a flyout from the Move Entities tool.
      2 Select all the lines in the entity.
      3 Define the scale factor.
    In this example a factor of 1.5 was selected.
      4 Click the Copy box (check mark).
    Checking the Copy box will cause the original drawing to remain when the scaled copy is
created.
      5 Define the Scale point.
    In this example the lower-left corner was selected. A preview will appear.
      6 Click the green OK check mark.

2-25 Stretch Entities
The Stretch Entities tool is used to extend the length of some of the lines in an entity. See
Figure 2-72.
Figure 2-72


Stretching an Entity
      1 Click the Stretch Entities tool.
   The Stretch Entities tool is a flyout from the Move Entities tool.
      2 Click only the lines that will be involved in the stretch.
   In this example five lines were selected.
      3 Click the Stretch about box.
   The box will turn blue when active.
      4 Define a Base point.
   For this example the lower-left corner (origin) was selected.
      5 Click and drag the Base point to stretch the entity.
      6 Click to specify the endpoint.
    For this example, the stretch drag was along the horizontal lower line of the entity, that is,
the X direction.
        7 Use the Smart Dimension tool to size the final stretch distance.
        8 Click the green OK check mark.

2-26 Split Entities
The Split Entities tool is used to trim away internal segments of an existing entity or to split an
entity into two or more parts by specifying split points.


 Note
 Not all sketching tools are shown on the Sketching panel. Additional sketch tools are accessed by clicking the Tools heading
 at the top of the screen when creating a Part document, and clicking the Sketch Tools option. A listing of all sketch tools will
 appear. See Figure 2-73.




Figure 2-73
Splitting an Entity
See Figure 2-74.
      1 Access the Split Entities tool by clicking Tools, Sketch Tools, and Split Entities.
Figure 2-74

    An entity must exist for the Split Entities tool to activate.
       2 Click two random points on the existing rectangle for the split.
    In this example two points were selected on the top horizontal line of the entity.
       3 Click the screen, right-click the line segment between the two points, and click the
         Delete option.
       4 Use the Smart Dimension tool to define the split length.
       5 Click the green OK check mark.

2-27 Jog Lines
The Jog Line tool is used to create a rectangular shape (jog) in a line. See Figure 2-75.
Figure 2-75


Using the Jog Line Tool
      1 Access the Jog Line tool by clicking Tools, Sketch Tools, and Jog Line.
      2 Click a point on the line and drag the cursor away from the line.
      3 Click a point to define the approximate size of the jog.
    A preview of the jog will appear.
      4 Repeat the process as necessary.
      5 Use the Smart Dimension tool to define the location and depth of the jog.
      6 Right-click the mouse and click the OK option.

2-28 Centerline
The Centerline tool is used to help define and locate the center of entities.
    Figure 2-76 shows an existing 2.00 2.00 × 4.00 rectangle. It is not centered on the origin,
and none of its lines touch the origin. The Centerline tool can be used to center the rectangle on
the origin.
Figure 2-76


Using the Centerline Tool
      1 Click the Centerline tool.
   The Centerline tool is a flyout from the Line tool.
      2 Draw a centerline diagonally across the rectangle.
      3 Right-click the mouse on the centerline near the middle of the centerline and click the
        Select Midpoint option.
      4 Hold down the <Ctrl> key and click the Origin.
      5 Click the Coincident option in the Add Relations box.
   The rectangle will relocate so that the origin is on the midpoint of the centerline.
      6 Click the green OK check mark.

2-29 Sample Problem SP2-1
Draw the shape shown in Figure 2-77.
      1 Start a New Part document, use inch units, and create the sketch on the Top plane.
      2 Use the Corner Rectangle and Smart Dimension tools and draw a 2.00 × 4.00
        rectangle with its lower-left corner coincidental with the origin.
Figure 2-77

      3 Use the Jog Line tool and add jogs at each end on the rectangle as shown. Use the
        Smart Dimension tool to size the jogs.
      4 Click the Features tab and click the Extruded Boss/Base tool.
      5 Set the extrude distance for 0.50in.
      6 Click the green OK check mark.
      7 Click the Fillet tool on the Features tool panel.
    This is the 3D application of the Fillet tool. The 2D application was discussed in Section 2-
12. The fillets could have been added to the 2D sketch and then extruded.
      8 Set the Fillet radius for .50in.
      9 Add the fillets as shown.
     10 Click the green OK check mark.

2-30 Sample Problem SP2-2
A circular pattern can be created using any shape. Figure 2-78 shows a slot shape located within
a large circle. A circular pattern can be created from the slot shape.
Figure 2-78

      1 Start a New Part document, use ANSI Standards, inch units, and create the sketch on
        the Top plane.
      2 Sketch a Ø7.50 circle centered on the origin and add the slot shape as shown.
      3 Click the Circular Sketch Pattern tool.
   The Circular Sketch Pattern tool is a flyout from the Linear Sketch Pattern tool.
      4 Click all the slot components (lines and arcs) in the slot shape.
      5 Set the number of instances in the pattern for 12.
   A preview will appear.
      6 Click the green OK check mark.
      7 Click the Features tab and click the Extruded Boss/Base tool.
      8 Set the extrude distance for 0.3in.
      9 Click the green OK check mark.
   The model in this sample problem could have been created by first creating a 3D disk,
sketching the slot shape on the disk, and cutting out the circular pattern.

2-31 Sample Problem SP2-3
Figure 2-79 shows a shape that includes fillets and rounded shapes. Draw the shape and extrude
it to a thickness of .375 inch.




Figure 2-79

       1 Start a New Part document, use ANSI Standards, inch units, and create the sketch on
         the Top plane.
    See Figure 2-80.
       2 Sketch the approximate shape of the part.
       3 Use the Smart Dimension tool and size the part.
       4 Use the Fillet tool and add fillets with a 0.25 radius as shown.
Figure 2-80

      5 Use the Corner Rectangle and Smart Dimension tools and add the 1.00 × 1.75
        rectangle as shown.
      6 Use the Fillet tool to add R0.25 fillets inside the 1.00 × 1.75 rectangle.
      7 Use the Circle, Line, Trim, and Smart Dimension tools to draw and locate the slot as
        shown.
      8 Click the Features tab and the Extruded Boss/Base tool.
      9 Set the extrude distance for 0.375in.
     10 Click the green OK check mark.

Chapter Projects

Project 2-1:
Redraw the objects in Figures P2-1 through P2-25 using the given dimensions. Create solid
models of the objects using the specified thicknesses.
Figure P2-1
INCHES
Figure P2-2
INCHES
Figure P2-3
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-4
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-5
INCHES
Figure P2-6
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-7
INCHES
Figure P2-8
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-9
INCHES
Figure P2-10
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-11
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-12
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-13
INCHES
Figure P2-14
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-15
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-16
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-17
INCHES
Figure P2-18
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-19
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-20
INCHES
Figure P2-21
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-22
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-23
INCHES
Figure P2-24
MILLIMETERS
Figure P2-25
INCHES

Project 2-2:
Draw a retaining ring based on the following dimensions shown in Figure P2-26 and as assigned
by your instructor.
Figure P2-26
