Chapter 5. Assemblies
Chapter Objectives

         Create assembly drawings
         Create exploded assembly drawings
         Create a parts list
         Animate an assembly
         Edit a title block



5-1 Introduction
This chapter introduces the Assembly tools. These tools are used to create Assembly documents.
Assemblies can be exploded to form isometric assembly drawings that when labeled and
accompanied by a parts list become working drawings. Assemblies can also be animated.

5-2 Starting an Assembly
Figure 5-1 shows a Test Block. The overall dimensions for the block are 80 × 80 × 80 mm.
The cutout is 40 × 40 × 80 mm. The Test Block will be used to help introduce the Assembly
tools. Draw the block and save it as BLOCK, TEST. Draw the Test Block so that one of its
corners is on the origin. If the origin icon does not appear on your drawing screen, click the View
tab, click Hide/Show, and click the Origins option. See Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-1
Figure 5-2

   See Figure 5-3.
      1 Click New.
      2 Select the Assembly format.
      3 Click OK.
Figure 5-3

   The Begin Assembly PropertyManager will appear. See Figure 5-4.
      4 Click the Browse button if BLOCK, TEST does not show automatically.
Figure 5-4

   The Open dialog box will appear. See Figure 5-5.
Figure 5-5

      5 Click BLOCK, TEST, then click Open.
   The Test Block will appear on the screen. See Figure 5-6.
Figure 5-6


 Note
 It is good practice to anchor the assembly to the assembly’s origin.



     Align the origin of the Test Block with the assembly’s origin.
        6 When the Test Block appears on the screen, click the green OK check mark in the
          upper-left corner of the screen.
     The Part origin and the Assembly origin will align.
        7 Click the Insert Components tool, click the Browse button, select the BLOCK,
          TEST, and insert a second block by clicking in the model space in a location that does
          not overlap the first block.
   See Figure 5-7. The first block inserted is fixed in place. In any assembly drawing the first
component will automatically be fixed in place. Note the (f) notation to the left of BLOCK,
TEST<1> in Figure 5-7. As the assembly is created, components will move to the fixed first
component.
Figure 5-7

 Tip
 To remove the fixed condition, locate the cursor on the (f) BLOCK, TEST<1> callout, right-click the mouse, and click the
 Float option. To return the block to the fixed condition or to fix another component, right-click the component name callout
 and select the Fix option.




5-3 Move Component
See Figure 5-8.
Figure 5-8

        1 Click the Move Component tool on the Assembly tab.
        2 Click the second block inserted and hold down the left mouse button.
        3 While holding down the left mouse button, move the block around the screen by
          moving the mouse.
        4 Release the button and click the green OK check mark.


 Note
 If you try to apply the Move tool to the fixed block, the block will not move. Float must be applied before the block can be
 moved.


     The entire assembly can be moved by pressing and holding down the <Ctrl> key and
holding down the mouse wheel while moving the cursor. The mouse wheel can be used to zoom
the assembly.

5-4 Rotate Component
See Figure 5-9.




Figure 5-9

      1 Click the Rotate Component tool.
    The Rotate Component tool is a flyout from the Move Component tool.
      2 Click the second block inserted and hold down the left mouse button.
      3 While holding down the left mouse button, rotate the block around the screen by
        moving the mouse.
      4 Release the button and click the green OK check mark.
      5 Use the Undo tool to return the block to its original position.

5-5 Mouse Gestures for Assemblies
The Mouse Gestures tools can be applied to assemblies. Mouse Gestures were introduced in
Section 2-2 of Chapter 2. To access the Mouse Gestures tools, click the Tools menu and select
the Customize option. Click the Mouse Gestures tab. See Figure 5-10.
Figure 5-10

     Scroll down the listings, watching the Command column for Assembly commands. The
default settings for Assembly drawings are the Front, Back, Left, Right, Top, and Bottom
orientation tools as well as two other tools. These may be changed as preferred. Up to 12 tools
may be added to the Mouse Gestures tool.
     To access the Mouse Gestures, press and hold down the right mouse button. The Mouse
Gestures wheel will show the selected settings. While still holding down the right mouse button,
move the cursor onto the selected tool and release the button. The selected tool will be applied to
the assembly. See Figure 5-11.
Figure 5-11

5-6 Mate
The Mate tool is used to align components to create assemblies. See Figure 5-12.
Figure 5-12


Creating the First Assembly Using Mates
Mate the two Test Blocks side by side.
      1 Click the Mate tool on the Assembly tab.
     See Figure 5-13. Note that the first block is listed in the Mate Selections box after it is
selected.
Figure 5-13

      2 Click the upper-right edge of the first block inserted.
      3 Click the upper-left edge on the second block.
   Note that the Coincident option became active automatically.
   The edges will align. See Figure 5-14.
      4 Click the green OK check mark to clear the tools.
   The Mate Selections box should be clear.
Figure 5-14


Creating a Second Assembly
Mate the two Test Blocks face to face.
      1 Use the Undo tool and return the blocks to their original positions.
     See Figure 5-15. The second Test Block must be rotated into a different position relative to
the first Test Block.
Figure 5-15

       2 Use the Move Component and Rotate Component tools and position the second
         block as shown.
       3 Use the Mate tool and click the lower-front face of each block.
    The second block will rotate relative to the first block. Recall that the first block is in the
fixed condition, and the second block is in the floating condition.
       4 Click the green OK check mark.
       5 Use the Mate tool again and click the two faces of the Test Block as shown.
       6 Click the Add/Finish Mate check mark on the toolbar, then click the green OK check
         mark in the Mate PropertyManager.
       7 Use the Mate tool for a third time, rotate the objects as shown, and click the two edges
         as shown in Figure 5-16.
       8 Click the green OK check mark.


Creating a Third Assembly
Mate the two Test Blocks to form a rectangular prism.
      1 Use the Undo tool and return the blocks to their original positions.
      2 Use the Rotate Component tool and position the second Test Block as shown.
      3 Click the green OK check mark.
      4 Use the Mate tool and click the surfaces of the blocks as shown.
    Use the mouse wheel to rotate the blocks so you can click the appropriate surfaces.
      5 Click the Add/Finish Mate check mark on the toolbar, click the green OK check mark
        in the Mate PropertyManager, and rotate the blocks as shown.
      6 Click the front surfaces of the blocks as shown.
      7 Click the Add/Finish Mate check mark on the toolbar, then click the green OK check
        mark in the Mate PropertyManager.
      8 Reorient the blocks so that the bottom surfaces are visible.
      9 Use the Mate tool and click the bottom surfaces of the blocks.
    Figure 5-16 shows the finished assembly.
Figure 5-16

5-7 Bottom-up Assemblies
Bottom-up assemblies are assemblies that are created for existing parts; that is, the parts have
already been created as models. In this example the three parts shown in Figure 5-17 have been
modeled and saved.
Figure 5-17

      1 Start a new document and select the Assembly format.
      2 Click the Browse button, then click the BLOCK, BOTTOM component.
      3 Click Open.
   See Figure 5-18. The BLOCK, BOTTOM will appear on the screen.




Figure 5-18

      4 Click the green OK check mark in the upper-left corner of the screen to align the origin
        of the block with the origin of the assembly.
   See Figure 5-19.
Figure 5-19

      5 Click the Insert Component tool, click the Browse button, and select BLOCK, TOP.
      6 Repeat the sequence and select Ø15 POST.
   See Figure 5-20.
Figure 5-20


Note
The BLOCK, BOTTOM was the first part entered and is fixed in its location, as designated by the (f) symbol in the
PropertyManager box.


       7 Use the Mate tool and click the centerpoint of the edge line of the BLOCK,
         BOTTOM and the BLOCK, TOP as shown in Figure 5-21.
Figure 5-21

     A dot will appear when the cursor is on the centerpoint of the edge. If the blocks do not
align, use the Mate tool again to align the blocks by clicking their end surfaces.
      8 Click the green OK check mark.
      9 Click the Mate tool and click the Concentric option.
    See Figure 5-22.
     10 Click the side of the Ø15 POST and the inside of the hole in the BLOCK, TOP.
Figure 5-22


Note
Click the surface of the components, not their edge lines. Clicking the edge lines would produce different results.



      11 Click the Add/Finish Mate check mark on the toolbar, then click the green OK check
         mark.
      12 Use the Mate tool and click the top surface of the Ø15 POST and the top surface of
         the BLOCK, TOP.
    See Figure 5-23.
      13 Click the Add/Finish Mate check mark on the toolbar, then click the green OK check
         mark.
      14 Save the assembly as Block Assembly.
Figure 5-23

    A listing of the mates can be seen by clicking the Mates heading in the PropertyManager.
See Figure 5-24.
Figure 5-24

     The origin icons can be removed from view using View, Hide/Show, Origins. For examples
in this book the origins will be shown.

5-8 Creating an Exploded Isometric Assembly
An exploded isometric assembly shows the components of an assembly pulled apart. This makes
it easier to see how the parts fit together.
      1 Click the Exploded View tool on the Assembly tab.
    See Figure 5-25.
      2 Click the top surface of the Ø15 POST.
Figure 5-25

    An axis system icon will appear. See Figure 5-26. The arrow in the Y-direction (the one
pointing vertically) will initially be yellow.
      3 Move the cursor onto the Y-direction arrow and hold down the left mouse button. The
        arrow will turn blue when selected.
      4 Drag the Ø15 POST to a location above the assembly as shown.
Figure 5-26

   A real-time scale will appear as you drag the Ø15 POST.
      5 Right-click the BLOCK, TOP and select the Done with step option. Click and drag
        the BLOCK, TOP vertically to a new location between Ø15 POST and BOTTOM,
        BLOCK.
      6 Click and move the BOTTOM, BLOCK vertically down if needed for more space.
      7 Click the green OK check mark.
      8 Save the assembly as Exploded Assembly.
   All three components should be listed in the PropertyManager.
   Figure 5-26 shows the final exploded assembly.

5-9 Creating an Exploded Isometric Drawing
      1 Create a new document using the Drawing format.
      2 Select the A-(ANSI) Landscape sheet format.
  3 Click the Browse button in the Model View PropertyManager that is open by default.
See Figure 5-27.
  4 Select Exploded Assembly; click Open.
  5 Set the Orientation for Isometric and the Display Style for Hidden Lines Visible.
  6 Move the cursor into the drawing area.
Figure 5-27

     A rectangular outline of the view will appear.
        7 Locate the view and click the left mouse button.
     Turn off the Origins tool if it is active.

 Tip
 As a general rule, hidden lines are not included on isometric drawings.




5-10 Assembly Numbers
Assembly numbers are numbers that identify a part within an assembly. They are different from
part numbers. A part number identifies a specific part, and the part number is unique to that part.
A part has only one part number but may have different assembly numbers in different
assemblies.
     Assembly numbers are created using the Balloon and Auto Balloon tools located on the
Annotation tab. See Figure 5-28.
Figure 5-28

        1 Click the Annotation tab.
        2 Click the Auto Balloon tool.
        3 Move the cursor into the Block Assembly area (a red outline will appear) and click the
          mouse.
     The Auto Balloon arrangements may not always be the best presentation. The balloons may
be rearranged or applied individually.

 Tip
 Balloons can be moved by first clicking them. They will change color. Click and hold either the balloon or the box that will
 appear on the arrow. Drag either the balloon or the arrow to a new location.



        4 Use the Undo tool to undo the auto balloons.
        5 Click the Balloon tool.
        6 Click each part and locate the balloon.
       7 Click the green OK check mark.
    See Figure 5-29. Note that all the leader lines from the parts to the balloons are drawn at
approximately the same angle. This gives the drawing a neat, organized look.




Figure 5-29

5-11 Bill of Materials (BOM or Parts List)
A bill of materials is a listing of all parts included in an assembly drawing. A bill of materials
may also be called a parts list.
       1 To access the Bill of Materials tool, click the Annotation tab, then the Tables and Bill
         of Materials tools.
    See Figure 5-30.
Figure 5-30

        2 Click the area of the Block Assembly.
     A box will appear around the Block Assembly. Click within that box.
        3 Click the green OK check mark.
  Pull the cursor back into the drawing area. The BOM will follow. Select a location for the
BOM and click the mouse.


 Note
 The information in the PART NUMBER column is each part’s file name. These names are directly linked by SolidWorks to
 the original parts. They can be manually edited, but if the assembly is changed and regenerated, the original part names will
 appear.




Editing the BOM
        1 Double-click the box directly under the heading PART NUMBER.
A warning dialog box will appear. See Figure 5-31.
Figure 5-31

      2 Click the Keep Link box.
    The Formatting dialog box will appear.
      3 Type in a part number.
      4 Click the Left Justify option if necessary.
      5 Click the box below the one just edited and enter the part numbers.
     Part numbers are different from assembly numbers (item numbers). A part number is
assigned to an individual part. The part number will never change. A specific part will always
have the same part number.
     When a part is entered into an assembly, it receives an assembly number. The assembly
number applies only to the individual assembly. The same part may also be used in a different
assembly and receive a different assembly number. The original part number will remain the
same.
     In this example the BLOCK, BOTTOM has a part number of AM-311-1 and an assembly
number of 1.
      6 Click the boxes under the DESCRIPTION heading and enter the descriptions.
    See Figure 5-32.
Figure 5-32


Adding Columns to the BOM
      1 Right-click the BLOCK, BOTTOM box in the DESCRIPTION column.
   See Figure 5-33.
      2 Click the Insert option, then click Column Right.
Figure 5-33

    A new column will appear to the right of the BLOCK, BOTTOM box and a dialog box will
appear above the new column.
      3 Click the Property name box and select the SW-Title (Title) option.
      4 Swipe and remove the Title entry and enter a new column heading.
    In this example the heading MATERIAL was entered.
      5 Enter the required materials for each part.
    In this example a material specification of SAE 1020 Steel was added. SAE 1020 Steel is a
type of mild steel.


Changing the Width of a Column
      1 Right-click one of the cells in the new column.
    See Figure 5-34.
      2 Select the Formatting option and click Column Width.
    The Column Width dialog box will appear.
      3 Enter a new value.
     In this example a value of 1.75in. was entered. Figure 5-34 shows the new column width.
Edit the other columns if necessary.
Figure 5-34


Changing the Width of Rows and Columns
The size of either rows or columns can be changed in real time by clicking and dragging the row
and column lines. See Figure 5-35.
      1 Click and drag the bottom horizontal line of the BOM.
      2 Release the mouse button when the desired size is reached.
      3 Click and drag the vertical lines to create a new format for the BOM.
Figure 5-35


Changing the BOM’s Font
The text font can be changed. In Figure 5-36 the font of the column heads was changed from the
default SolidWorks font Century Gothic to Times New Roman and made bold.
Figure 5-36

      1 Swipe the text to be changed.
      2 Click the Use Document Font tool.
      3 Select a new font.
      4 Click the Bold (B) button.

5-12 Title Blocks
A title block contains information about the drawing. See Figure 5-37. The information
presented in a title block varies from company to company but usually includes the company’s
name, the drawing name and part number, the drawing scale, and a revision letter.




Figure 5-37


Revision Letters
As a drawing goes through its production cycle, changes are sometimes made. The changes may
be because of errors but they may also be because of the availability of new materials,
manufacturing techniques, or new customer requirements. As the changes are incorporated into
the drawing, a new revision letter is added to the drawing.
 Note
 SolidWorks automatically enters the file name of the document as the part number. In the example shown in Figure 5-37 the
 drawing number Exploded block is not the document’s part number. The title block will have to be edited and the correct part
 number entered.




Editing a Title Block
See Figure 5-38.
        1 Right-click the mouse and select the Edit Sheet Format option.
        2 Double-click the Exploded block file name.
     The Formatting dialog box will appear.
Figure 5-38

      3 Change the DWG. NO. to BU-ME 407.
      4 Change the font size to fit the number within the DWG. NO. box.
   In this example a size of 20 was selected.
      5 Click the drawing screen.
   The Notes tool is used to add text to the other boxes in the Title Block. See Figure 5-39.
Figure 5-39

      6 Click the Annotation tab, click the Note tool, locate the note within the title, and enter
        the drawing name (EXPLODED ASSEMBLY).
    In this example the font height was changed to 16.
      7 Click the drawing screen.
      8 Use the Note tool to add the company name.
   In this example “Boston University” was added. Consider using your own school or
company name.


Release Blocks
A finished engineering drawing is a legal document that goes through a release process before it
becomes final. The release block documents the release process. For example, once you have
completed a drawing, you will initial and date the DRAWN box located just to the left of the
title block. The drawing will then go to a checker, who, after reviewing and incorporating any
changes, will sign and date the CHECKED box. See Figure 5-40.
Figure 5-40


Tolerance Blocks
The tolerance block will be discussed in Chapter 8, “Tolerancing.”


Application Blocks
See Figure 5-41.
Figure 5-41

     This block is used to reference closely related drawings. In this example, we know that the
block assembly will be used on assembly ME-312A and that it was also used on EK131-46. This
information makes it easier to access related drawings that can be checked for interfaces.


 Note
 The note “DO NOT SCALE DRAWING” located at the bottom of the application block is a reminder not to measure the
 views on the drawing. If a dimension is missing, do not measure the distance on the drawing, because the drawing may not
 have been reproduced at the exact 100% scale of the original.




5-13 Animate Collapse
Exploded Assemblies can be animated. In this example the Animate Collapse tool will be used.
        1 Open the EXPLODED ASSEMBLY.
        2 Right-click the EXPLODED ASSEMBLY heading in the FeatureManager.
     See Figure 5-42.
      3 Click the Animate collapse option.




Figure 5-42

   The assembly will automatically be animated and start to move. See Figure 5-43.
      4 Click the Stop button to stop the animation and return the assembly to the exploded
        position.
      5 Close the Animation Controller.
Figure 5-43

    In this example the Animate collapse option was used because the assembly was shown in
the exploded position. Had the assembly been in a closed assembled position, the Animate
explode option would have been used.

5-14 Sample Problem SP5-1
Figure 5-44 shows the components for the Rotator Assembly. The dimensions for the
components can be found in Project P5-10 at the end of the chapter. Draw and save the four
Rotator Assembly components as Part documents.
Figure 5-44

        1 Start a new Assembly document.
        2 Insert the PLATE, CROSSLINK, and two LINK-Ls into the assembly.


Note
Insert the PLATE first so it will be fixed (f) and align its origin with the origin of the assembly.


        3 Click the Mate tool.
        4 Click the Concentric tool.
        5 Click the side of the bottom post of one LINK-L and the inside of the left hole in the
          PLATE.
     See Figure 5-45. The LINK-L and PLATE will align.

 Tip
 Click the surfaces of the posts and holes. Do not click the edge lines.
      6 Click the green OK check mark.
      7 Click the Mate tool.
      8 Click the top surface of the PLATE and the bottom surface of the LINK-L.
    See Figure 5-46. Use the Rotate View tool to manipulate the view orientation so that the
bottom surface of the LINK-L is visible. The part also can be rotated by holding down the mouse
wheel and moving the cursor.




Figure 5-45
Figure 5-46

      9 Click the Distance tool and then the Distance box and enter a value. In this example a
        value of 2.0mm was entered.
     See Figure 5-47. The initial offset values may be in inches. Enter the new value of 2.00
followed by mm, and the system will automatically change to metric (millimeter) distances.
Figure 5-47

     10 Click the green OK check mark.
   The 2.00mm distance will allow for clearance between the PLATE and the LINK-L.
   Figure 5-48 shows the 2mm offset between the PLATE and the LINK-L.
     11 Return the assembly to the Isometric orientation.
     12 Repeat the procedure for the other LINK-L.
   See Figure 5-49.
Figure 5-48
Figure 5-49

     13 Access the Mate tool and use the Concentric tool to align the top post of the first
        LINK-L with the left hole in the CROSSLINK.
     14 Access the Mate tool, click the Concentric tool, and align the right hole in the
        CROSSLINK with the post on the second LINK-L.
     15 Use the Mate tool and click the top surface of the LINK-L’s post and the top surface of
        the CROSSLINK.
     16 Use the Mate tool and click the top surface of the second LINK-L’s post and the top
        surface of the CROSSLINK.
   See Figure 5-50.
     17 Click the green OK check mark.
   See Figure 5-51.
Figure 5-50
Figure 5-51

       18 Locate the cursor on the CROSSLINK and move it around.
    The CROSSLINK and two LINK-Ls should rotate about the PLATE.
       19 Save the assembly as Rotator Assembly.

 Tip
 All mates will be listed in the FeatureManager.




5-15 Using the Motion Study Tool
        1 Access the Rotator Assembly.
        2 Click the Mate tool, then click the Parallel tool.
        3 Make the front surface line of the CROSSLINK parallel to the front edge of the
          PLATE; click the green OK check mark.
     This step will ensure that the CROSSLINK rotates in an orientation parallel to the front edge
of the PLATE. See Figure 5-52.




Figure 5-52

       4 Click the Motion Study tab at the bottom of the screen.
    See Figure 5-53.
Figure 5-53

      5 Click the Motor tool.
   The Motor PropertyManager box will appear.
   See Figure 5-54.
Figure 5-54

      6 Click the Rotary Motor tool.
      7 Click the box under the Component/Direction heading, then click the top surface of
        the left LINK-L.
    The box will have a blue background when it is active.
    The left LINK-L is now the driver link. An arrow will appear indicating the direction of
motion. It will drive the other components.


Viewing the Assembly Motion
      1 Go to the Motion box on the Motor PropertyManager and define the assembly’s
        motion.
    In this example the default values of Constant Speed and 100 RPM were accepted.
      2 Click the green OK check mark.
    See Figure 5-55.
      3 Click Play.
Figure 5-55

5-16 Editing a Part Within an Assembly
Parts already inserted into an assembly drawing can be edited. Figure 5-56 shows the block
assembly created earlier in the chapter. The general operating concept is to isolate a part, make
the changes, and insert the part back into the assembly.
     In this example we will change the diameter value of the hole in BLOCK, TOP.
Figure 5-56

      1 Click the arrowhead to the left of the BLOCK, TOP heading in the FeatureManager.
      2 Click the arrowhead to the left of Cut-Extrusion 1 under the BLOCK, TOP heading
        in the FeatureManager.
   In this example the Cut-Extrusion 1 is the hole in BLOCK, TOP. Your assembly and parts
may differ. See Figure 5-57.
Figure 5-57

      3 Right-click the Sketch2 heading and click the Edit Sketch option.
      4 Double-click the Ø15 hole value and enter a new value.
   In this example, the value was changed to Ø20.0. See Figure 5-58.
Figure 5-58

      5 Click the green OK check mark.
      6 Click the Exit Sketch option.
      7 Click the Edit Assembly tool located in the upper-right corner of the drawing screen.
    If necessary, use the Exploded View tool to create an exploded view of the assembly.
Figure 5-59 shows BLOCK, TOP with the enlarged hole.
Figure 5-59

5-17 Interference Detection/Clearance Verification
Assemblies contain multiple parts, and these parts must fit together appropriately. SolidWorks
contains Interference Detection and Clearance Verification tools that can be used to confirm
that the assembly is feasibly developed with no overlapping parts.


Interference Detection
The Interference Detection tool is used to determine whether there are interferences within an
assembly. SolidWorks will assemble parts as instructed without regard to interferences. It is
possible for two parts to be put together in an assembly that would, in reality, not fit together.
     Figure 5-61 shows a simple assembly made from two parts whose dimensions are shown in
Figure 5-60. All the dimensions use whole numbers. There are no tolerances specified. From the
given dimensions we know that there is an interference between the Base and the Top. The shaft
on the Base is Ø60 and the hole in the Top is Ø58. The Interference Detection tool can be used
to highlight this interference.
Figure 5-60
Figure 5-61


Detecting an Interference
      1 Click the Evaluate tab at the top of the screen and select the Interference Detection
        tool.
     See Figure 5-62. The Assembly will appear enclosed in a wireframe box. A note will appear
indicating that an interference has been detected.
Figure 5-62

       2 Click the Calculate button.
     The interference will be highlighted using a red hollow cylinder. See Figure 5-63. There will
also be a sound indicating an interference has been detected.
Figure 5-63

     Figure 5-64 shows an assembly. The eight fasteners in the Base have a diameter of Ø8.00.
The eight holes in the Cover Plate have a diameter of Ø6.00. When the Interference Detection
tool is applied, the interference between the fasteners and holes is detected. One fastener hole
interference will be highlighted on the assembly. All the interferences will be listed in the
Results box.
     It is good practice to always apply the Interference Detection tool to an assembly to ensure
that there are no interferences.
Figure 5-64

    Figure 5-65 shows a similar assembly, but the eight holes in the Cover Plate have been
enlarged to Ø10.
Figure 5-65

    The Ø10 holes should create a clearance between the Fasteners and the Cover Plate’s
holes.


Verifying the Clearance
      1 Click the Evaluate tab and select the Clearance Verification tool.
    See Figure  5-66. We   know       the    clearance  should               be   1.0mm   (
10 mm Hole − 8.0mm = 2.0 mm; half the distance = 1.0 mm).
Figure 5-66

      2 Click a fastener and the Cover Plate.
    Part file names should appear in the Selected Components box.
      3 Click the Calculate button.
     See Figure 5-67. SolidWorks has verified that there is a 1.0mm clearance between the
fasteners and the holes in the cover plate.
Figure 5-67


Removing the Interference
Figure 5-68 shows the assembly originally shown in Figure 5-61. There is an interference
between the Post on the Base and the Hole in the Top. The interference can be removed by
editing the original BLOCK, TOP part, or it can be edited in the assembly mode.




Figure 5-68

      1 Locate the Sketch that created the hole in the FeatureManager Design Tree.
      2 Right-click the Sketch.
      3 Click the Edit Sketch option.
    The hole’s diameter value will appear. See Figure 5-69. In this example the diameter is Ø58.
Figure 5-69

      4 Double-click the Ø58 value and change it to Ø62.
      5 Click the Exit Sketch icon in the upper-right corner of the screen and the Return to
        the FeatureManager Design Tree icon.
   There is now a clearance between the Base and Top parts.
      6 Click the Interference Detection tool again.
      7 Click the Calculate box.
   The results box will indicate that no interferences were found. See Figure 5-70.
Figure 5-70


Verifying that a Clearance Exists
The Clearance Verification tool is used to ensure that clearances have been created.
      1 Click the Evaluate tab at the top of the screen.
      2 Click the Clearance Verification tool.
      3 Click the two parts.
      4 Click the Calculate box.
     The Clearance Verification will be listed in the Results box and the onscreen assembly
will show the clearance. See Figure 5-71.
Figure 5-71

Chapter Projects

Project 5-1:
Create a Part document of the SQBLOCK using the given dimensions. Create assemblies using
two SQBLOCKS, positioning the blocks as shown in Figures P5-1A through P5-1G.
    Pages 305–316 show a group of parts. These parts are used to create the assemblies
presented as problems in this section. Use the given descriptions, part numbers, and materials
when creating BOMs for the assemblies.
Figure P5-1
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-2:
Redraw the models in Figure P5-2 and save them as Standard (mm).ipn files. All dimensions
are in millimeters.
Figure P5-2
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-3:
Create an exploded isometric assembly drawing of the shown in Figure P5-3. Create a BOM.
Figure P5-3
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-4:
Create an exploded isometric assembly drawing of the shown in Figure P5-4. Create a BOM.
Figure P5-4
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-5:
Create an exploded isometric assembly drawing of the shown in Figure P5-5. Create a BOM.
Figure P5-5
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-6:
Create an exploded isometric assembly drawing of the shown in Figure P5-6. Create a BOM.
Figure P5-6
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-7:
Create an exploded isometric assembly drawing of the shown in Figure P5-7. Create a BOM.
Figure P5-7
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-8:
Create an exploded isometric assembly drawing of the shown in Figure P5-8. Create a BOM.
Figure P5-8
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-9:
Create an original assembly and drawing based on the parts shown on pages 347–349. Include an
isometric view, an exploded isometric view with assembly numbers, and a BOM. Use at least 12
parts.

Project 5-10:
Draw the ROTATOR ASSEMBLY shown in Figure P5-10. Include the following:
   A. An assembly drawing
   B. An exploded isometric drawing with assembly numbers
   C. A parts list
   D. LINKs should carry the CROSSLINK. The CROSSLINK should remain parallel during
      the rotation.
Note
This assembly was used in the section on animating assemblies. See page 341.
Figure P5-10
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-11:
Draw the FLY ASSEMBLY shown in Figure P5-11. Include the following:
  A. An assembly drawing
  B. An exploded isometric drawing with assembly numbers
  C. A parts list
  D. An animated assembly; the FLYLINK should rotate around the SUPPORT base.
Figure P5-11
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-12:
Draw the ROCKER ASSEMBLY shown in Figure P5-12. Include the following:
  A. An assembly drawing
  B. An exploded isometric drawing with assembly numbers
  C. A parts list
  D. An animated assembly
Figure P5-12
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-13:
Draw the LINK ASSEMBLY shown in Figure P5-13. Include the following:
  A. An assembly drawing
  B. An exploded isometric drawing with assembly numbers
  C. A parts list
  D. An animated assembly; the HOLDER ARM should rotate between −30° and +30°.
Figure P5-13
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-14:
Draw the PIVOT ASSEMBLY shown in Figure P5-14 using the dimensioned components given.
Include the following:
  A. A 3D exploded isometric drawing
  B. A parts list
Figure P5-14
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-15:

Soma Cube Puzzle
The Soma Cube puzzle was invented by Piet Hein in 1933. It makes an interesting assembly
problem. Each of the 27 cubes used is the same size. They are combined to form seven solid
shapes, each of which has an internal edge. When correctly combined they will form a 3 × 3 × 3
cube.
   A. Specify a cube size.
   B. Create the seven different shapes shown in Figure P5-15.
   C. Assemble the seven shapes to create a 3 × 3 × 3 cube.
   D. Physically build the seven shapes out of poster board and assemble them.
Figure P5-15
MILLIMETERS

Project 5-16:
Draw the assembly shown in Figure P5-16.
   A. An assembly drawing
   B. An exploded isometric drawing with assembly numbers
   C. A parts list
   D. An animated assembly. Make the Crank the driver.
Figure P5-16

Project 5-17:

Slider Assembly—Millimeters
Draw the Slider Assembly shown in Figure P5-17.
   A. An assembly drawing
   B. An exploded isometric drawing with assembly numbers
   C. A parts list
   D. An animated assembly. Make the Driver Wheel the driver.
Figure P5-17
