Chapter 7. Dimensioning
Chapter Objectives

         Dimension objects
         Learn ANSI standards and conventions
         Dimension different shapes and features
         Learn fundamentals of 3D dimensioning



7-1 Introduction
Dimensions are added to SolidWorks on Drawing documents. Dimensions will appear in Part
documents, but these are construction dimensions. These sketch dimensions are used to create a
part and are used when a sketch is edited. They may be modified as the part is being created
using the Smart Dimension tool. They will not appear on the finished model or in Assembly
documents.
     Figure 7-1 shows a dimensioned shape. The drawing on the left in Figure 7-1 shows the
sketch dimensions that were used as the part was being created. The drawing on the right in
Figure 7-1 shows dimensions that were created using the Smart Dimension tool in a Drawing
document. These are defining dimensions and will appear on the working drawings. This chapter
will show how to apply these types of dimensions.
     SolidWorks has ANSI Inch and ANSI Metric dimensions available. Other dimensioning
systems such as ISO also are available. This text is in compliance with ANSI standards.
Figure 7-1

7-2 Terminology and Conventions—ANSI
Dimensions are added to drawings to define the part and guide manufacturing. General rules and
conventions are used to dimension a drawing in a complete, orderly, and succinct manner.


Common Terms
Figure 7-2 shows both ANSI- and ISO-style dimensions. The terms apply to both styles.
Figure 7-2

      Dimension lines: In mechanical drawings, lines between extension lines that end with an
      arrowhead and include a numerical dimensional value located within the line.
      Extension lines: Lines that extend away from an object and allow dimensions to be
      located off the surface of an object.
      Leader lines: Lines drawn at an angle, not horizontal or vertical, that are used to
      dimension specific shapes such as holes. The start point of a leader line includes an
      arrowhead. Numerical values are drawn at the end opposite the arrowhead.
      Linear dimensions: Dimensions that define the straight-line distance between two points.
      Angular dimensions: Dimensions that define the angular value, measured in degrees,
      between two straight lines.


Dimensioning Conventions
There are general guidelines you should follow when dimensioning drawings. Figure 7-3 shows
some of the following guidelines applied to a dimensioned part.
Figure 7-3

      Dimension lines should be drawn evenly spaced; that is, the distance between dimension
      lines should be uniform. A general rule of thumb is to locate dimension lines about 1/2in.
      or 15mm apart.
      There should be a noticeable gap between the edge of a part and the beginning of an
      extension line. This serves as a visual break between the object and the extension line.
      The visual difference between the line types can be enhanced by using different colors for
      the two types of lines.
      Leader lines are used to define the size of holes and should be positioned so that the
      arrowhead points toward the center of the hole.
      Centerlines may be used as extension lines. No gap is used when a centerline is extended
      beyond the edge lines of an object.
      Align dimension lines whenever possible to give the drawing a neat, organized
      appearance.


Common Errors to Avoid
See Figure 7-4.




Figure 7-4

       Avoid crossing extension lines. Place longer dimensions farther away from the object
       than shorter dimensions.
       Do not locate dimensions within cutouts; always use extension lines.
       Do not locate any dimension close to the object. Dimension lines should be at least 1/2in.
       or 15mm from the edge of the object.
       Avoid long extension lines. Locate dimensions in the same general area as the feature
       being defined.

7-3 Adding Dimensions to a Drawing
Figure 7-5 shows a part that includes two holes. This section will explain how to add dimensions
to the part. The part was drawn as a Part document and saved as BLOCK, 2 HOLES. See
Figure 7-10 for the part’s dimensions. The part is 0.50 thick. Save the part and start a new
Drawing document.
Figure 7-5

      1 Click New, Drawing, and OK to start a new drawing. Use a B (ANSI) Landscape
        sheet size.
      2 Click the View Layout tab, Model View, and create a top view of the BLOCK, 2
        HOLES part.
   In this example we will work with only one view. See Figure 7-6.
Figure 7-6

    Extend the horizontal center mark from the left hole to the horizontal centerline of the right
hole.
       3 Click the horizontal centerline of the left hole. Small blue boxes will appear on the
         center mark.
       4 Click and drag the horizontal centerline from the left hole to the right hole.
    The holes now have the same horizontal centerline so only one vertical dimension can be
used to define the hole’s location. See Figure 7-7.
Figure 7-7

 Tip
 Centerlines can be extended by first clicking them and then dragging an endpoint to a new location.



        5 Use the Smart Dimension tool and add the horizontal and vertical dimensions as
          shown.
    See Figure 7-8.
Figure 7-8

    Note that the dimension values for the vertical dimensions are written horizontally. This is in
compliance with ANSI standards. For this example, the Century Gothic font was made bold with
14-point height.

 Rule
 Keep dimension lines aligned and evenly spaced.



        6 Click the Hole Callout tool located on the Annotation panel, click the edge of the left
          hole, and move the cursor away from the hole.
     Note that the leader arrow always points to the center of the hole.
        7 Select a location off the surface of the part and click the mouse.

 Rule
 Never locate dimensions on the surface of the part.
See Figure 7-9. The word THRU is optional. Some companies require it and some do not.
Figure 7-9

      8 Go to the Dimension PropertyManager at the left of the screen, locate the cursor in
        the Dimension Text box, and delete the word THRU.
   The text already in the box defines the hole’s diameter.
      9 Move the cursor to the end of the existing text line, and type - 2 HOLES.
     10 Click the green OK check mark.
   Move the dimensions if needed to create neat, uniform dimensions.
   See Figure 7-10.
     11 Save the drawing.
Figure 7-10

 Tip
 Dimensions can be relocated by clicking and dragging the dimension text.




Controlling Dimensions
Various aspects of dimensions can be edited, such as text height, arrow location, and text values.
        1 Click the Options tool at the top of the screen.
    The Documents Properties - Drafting Standard dialog box will appear. See Figure 7-11.
        2 Click the Document Properties tab.
        3 Click the Dimensions option.
     The Document Properties - Dimensions dialog box can be used to edit the style and form
of dimensions. It can also be used to change the way arrows are applied.
        4 Click the Font option.
     The Choose Font dialog box will appear. See Figure 7-11. This dialog box can be used to
change the font, font style, and height of dimension text. The height of text can be measured in
inches, millimeters, or points. A point refers to a space that equals about 1/72 of an inch. (There
are 12 points to a pica.)
Figure 7-11

      5 Click the Height: Units radio button and change the height to 0.250in.
    Note that the SolidWorks default font is Century Gothic.
      6 Click OK, then OK.
    Figure 7-11 shows dimensions created using the Times New Roman font. Fonts for
drawings should always be easy to read and not too stylistic.


Dimensioning Short Distances
Figure 7-12 shows an object that includes several short distances. We will start by using the
standard dimensions settings and show how to edit them for a particular situation.
Figure 7-12

        1 Use the Smart Dimension tool and add dimensions to the drawing.
     Note that the arrows for the .50 dimension are aligned with the arrows for the 1.00
dimensions. Dimensions that are aligned in a single row are called chain dimensions. Note that
the .25 dimension is crowded between the two extension lines.

 Rule
 Never squeeze dimension values. Dimension values should always be presented clearly and legible.



    There are several possible solutions to the crowded .25 value.
        2 Click and drag the .25 dimension to the right outside the extension lines.
        3 Add the 4.00 overall dimension.
    Dimensions that define the total length and width of an object are called overall dimensions.
In this example the dimension 4.00 defines the total length of the part, so it is an overall
dimension. Overall dimensions are located farthest away from the edge of the part.
    The right edge of the part, the section below the .25, does not need a dimension. The reason
for this will be discussed in the next chapter on tolerancing.

 Tip
 To delete an existing dimension, click the dimension and press the <Del> key.



     Figure 7-12 shows two other options for dimensioning. The first is the baseline method, in
which all dimensions are taken from the same datum line. The second method is a combination
of chain and baseline dimensions.

 Rule
 Never dimension the same distance twice. This is called double dimensioning.



     Figure 7-13 shows an example of double dimensioning. The top edge distance is
dimensioned twice: once using the 1.00 + .50 + 1.00 + .25 + 1.25 dimensions, and a second
time using the 4.00 dimension. One of the dimensions must be omitted. Double dimensioning
will be explained in more detail in Chapter 8.
Figure 7-13


Autodimension Tool
The Autodimension tool will automatically add dimensions to a drawing.

 Warning
 The dimensions created using the Autodimension tool are not always in the best locations. The dimensions must be relocated
 to be in compliance with ANSI conventions.



    Figure 7-14 shows a shape to be dimensioned using the Autodimension tool.
        1 Click the Annotation tab, click the Smart Dimension tool, and click the
          Autodimension tab.
        2 Select the Chain Scheme, define Edge 1 and Edge 2, click the Apply box, and click
          the OK check mark.
Figure 7-14

    SolidWorks will automatically pick edges 1 and 2. If it does not, or the edges selected are
not the ones you want, click the Edge box, then click the edge. The word Edge<1> should
appear in the box.
    Figure 7-14 shows the dimensions applied using the Autodimension tool. They are not in
acceptable positions.
      3 Rearrange the dimensions to comply with standard conventions.
    Figure 7-15 shows the shape shown in Figure 7-14 dimensioned using the baseline scheme,
which is created as follows.
Figure 7-15


Creating Baseline Dimensions
       1 Access the Autodimension tool and select the Baseline Scheme.
       2 Select Edge 1 and Edge 2.
       3 Click Apply.
       4 Click the green OK check mark.
    Figure 7-15 shows the dimensions created by the Autodimension tool and how the
dimensions can be rearranged.


Creating Ordinate Dimensions
Figure 7-16 shows the object dimensioned using the Ordinate Scheme of the Autodimension
tool. The Autodimension tool did better placing the ordinate dimensions in this instance, but if
some of the created dimensions are located on the surface of the part, this would be a violation of
the convention that dimensions should never be located on the surface of the part. Figure 7-16
shows how the ordinate dimensions were rearranged.
Figure 7-16

7-4 Drawing Scale
Drawings are often drawn “to scale” because the actual part is either too big to fit on a sheet of
drawing paper or too small to be seen. For example, a microchip circuit must be drawn at several
thousand times its actual size to be seen.
    Drawing scales are written using the following formats:
      SCALE: 1 = 1
      SCALE: FULL
      SCALE: 1000 = 1
      SCALE: .25 = 1
     In each example the value on the left indicates the scale factor. A value greater than 1
indicates that the drawing is larger than actual size. A value smaller than 1 indicates that the
drawing is smaller than actual size.
     Regardless of the drawing scale selected, the dimension values must be true size. Figure 7-
17 shows the same rectangle drawn at two different scales. The top rectangle is drawn at a scale
of 1 = 1, or its true size. The bottom rectangle is drawn at a scale of 2 = 1, or twice its true size.
In both examples the 3.00 dimension remains the same.




Figure 7-17

7-5 Units
It is important to understand that dimension values are not the same as mathematical units.
Dimension values are manufacturing instructions and always include a tolerance, even if the
tolerance value is not stated. Manufacturers use a predefined set of standard dimensions that are
applied to any dimensional value that does not include a written tolerance. Standard tolerance
values differ from organization to organization. Figure 7-18 shows a chart of standard tolerances.
Figure 7-18

     In Figure 7-19 a distance is dimensioned twice: once as 5.50 and a second time as 5.5000.
Mathematically these two values are equal, but they are not the same manufacturing instruction.
The 5.50 value could, for example, have a standard tolerance of ±.01, whereas the 5.5000 value
could have a standard tolerance of ±.0005. A tolerance of ±.0005 is more difficult and
therefore more expensive to manufacture than a tolerance of ±.01.
Figure 7-19

     Figure 7-20 shows examples of units expressed in millimeters and in decimal inches. A zero
is not required to the left of the decimal point for decimal inch values less than one. Millimeter
values do not require zeros to the right of the decimal point. Millimeter and decimal inch values
never include symbols; the units will be defined in the title block of the drawing.
Figure 7-20


Aligned Dimensions
Aligned dimensions are dimensions that are parallel to a slanted edge or surface. They are not
horizontal or vertical. The units for aligned dimensions should be written horizontally. This is
called unidirectional dimensioning.
     Figure 7-21 shows the front, right-side, and isometric views of a part with a slanted surface.
The dimensions were applied using the Smart Dimension tool. Note that the slanted dimension,
aligned with the slanted surface, has unidirectional (horizontal) text. The hole dimension was
created using the Note tool from the Annotation tab.
Figure 7-21


Hole Dimensions
Figure 7-22 shows an object that has two holes, one blind and one completely through. The
object has filleted corners. In this section we will add dimensions to the views.
Figure 7-22

    The holes were drawn using the Hole Wizard tool. The Hole Wizard tool will
automatically create a conical point to a blind hole.
       1 Use the Smart Dimension tool and locate the two holes.
     See Figure 7-23. In general, dimensions are applied from the inside out; that is, starting with
the features in the middle of the part and working out to the overall dimensions. Leader lines are
generally applied last, as they have more freedom of location.
Figure 7-23

        2 Use the Linear Center Mark tool to draw a centerline between the two holes and use
          the Centerline tool to add the vertical centerline in the front and side views.
    The centerline between the two holes indicates that the vertical 30 dimension applies to both
holes.


 Note
 Centerlines should extend beyond the edges of the part. Centerlines can be extended by first clicking the centerline. Blue end
 boxes will appear. Click and drag the blue end boxes to a point beyond the edges of the part.


        3 Use the Smart Dimension tool and add a dimension to one of the filleted corners.
     See Figure 7-24.
Figure 7-24

 Tip
 The dimension options found on the Document PropertyManager will change all dimensions. Clicking a dimension and
 using the Dimension PropertyManager allows you to change just that dimension.



       4 Click the fillet dimension again, go to the Dimension Text block on the Dimension
         PropertyManager, and type - 4 CORNERS as shown in Figure 7-25.
Figure 7-25

      5 Click OK, Apply, and OK.
      6 Use the Hole Callout tool on the Annotation panel and dimension the Ø16 hole.
    The Ø16 hole goes completely through the part, so no depth specification is required. See
Figure 7-26. The word THRU is optional and may be removed.
      7 Use the Hole Callout tool and Dimension the Ø25 hole.
Figure 7-26

     The hole callout will include the depth symbol (see Figure 7-27) and a depth value of 30
(see Figure 7-28).
     Complete the dimensions.
Figure 7-27
Figure 7-28

   See Figure 7-29.
Figure 7-29


 Note
 If the Smart Dimension tool had been used, the dimension would have to be edited in the Dimension Text area and the depth
 symbol and a numerical value added.




7-6 Dimensioning Holes and Fillets
A blind hole is a hole that does not go completely through an object. It has a depth requirement.
Figure 7-30 shows a 2.00 × 2.00 × 2.00 cube with a blind Ø.50 × 1.18 DEEP hole. It was
created as follows.


Dimensioning a Blind Hole
        1 Draw the block.
        2 Click the Hole Wizard tool.
     See Figure 7-30.
Figure 7-30

      3 Click the Hole tool in the Hole Type box. Define the hole using the ANSI Inch
        standard with a Size of 1/2 and a Blind Hole Depth of 1.18in.
      4 Click the Positions tab.
      5 Locate the hole as shown.
    The initial location is an approximation. Use the Smart Dimension tool to specify the exact
location of the hole’s centerpoint.
      6 Click the green OK check mark.
      7 Save the drawing as Block, Blind.
      8 Start a new Drawing document and create a front and a top orthographic view of the
        Block, Blind.
      9 Add dimensions to the views.
     10 Click the Annotation tab and click the Hole Callout option.
     11 Click the edge of the hole, move the cursor away from the hole, define a location for
        the hole callout, and click the mouse. The hole callout dimension will initially appear
          as a rectangular box.
    Change the height of the text font if necessary.
      12 Save the drawing.
    Note that the hole includes a conical point. Holes manufactured using twist drills will have
conical points. The conical point is not included in the hole’s depth dimension. A special drill bit
can be used to create a flat-bottomed hole.
    Figure 7-31 shows three different methods that can be used to dimension a blind hole.




Figure 7-31

    Figure 7-32 shows three methods of dimensioning holes in section views. The single line
note version is the preferred method.
Figure 7-32


Dimensioning Hole Patterns
Figure 7-33 shows two different hole patterns dimensioned. The circular pattern includes the
note Ø10 − 4 HOLES. This note serves to define all four holes within the object.
Figure 7-33

     Figure 7-33 also shows a rectangular object that contains five holes of equal diameter,
equally spaced from one another. The notation 5 × Ø10 specifies five holes of 10 diameter. The
notation 4 × 20 (= 80) means four equal spaces of 20. The notation (= 80) is a reference
dimension and is included for convenience. Reference dimensions are explained in Chapter 9.
     Figure 7-34 shows two additional methods for dimensioning repeating hole patterns. Figure
7-35 shows a circular hole pattern that includes two different hole diameters. The hole diameters
are not noticeably different and could be confused. One group is defined by indicating letter A;
the other is dimensioned in a normal manner.
Figure 7-34




Figure 7-35

7-7 Dimensioning Counterbored and Countersunk Holes
Counterbored holes are dimensioned in the sequence of their manufacture. First the hole’s
diameter is given, then the counterbore diameter, then the depth of the counterbore.
    Figure 7-36 shows a part that contains two counterbored holes; one goes completely through
and the other is blind. Dimensions will be applied to both.
      1 Create a 3.00 × 4.00 × 1.75 block.
      2 Click the Hole Wizard tool, click the Counterbore option, and insert the counterbored
        hole that goes completely through.
      3 Specify the Standard as ANSI Inch, the Type as Hex Screw, the Size as a 3/8
        diameter, and the End Condition as Through All.
Figure 7-36

    See Figure 7-37. SolidWorks will automatically select the diameter for the counterbored
hole that will accommodate a Ø3/8 Hex Head Screw.
    Depending on your default settings, the counterbored hole may have a small chamfer added.
The countersink can be removed by removing the check mark in the Options box on the Hole
Specification manager.
Figure 7-37

      4 Position the hole using the given dimensions.
      5 Add the second hole, setting the End Condition to Blind and 1.00 deep.
      6 Position the hole using the given dimensions.
      7 Save the block as Block, Cbore.
      8 Start a new Drawing document and create a front and a top orthographic view of the
        Block, Cbore.
      9 Click the Annotation tab and add all dimensions and centerlines other than the hole
        dimensions.
     10 Click the Hole Callout tool.
   See Figure 7-38.
     11 Click the edge of each hole, move the cursor away from the hole, and click the mouse
        when a suitable location is found.
   The counterbored hole’s dimension note is interpreted as shown in Figure 7-38.
Figure 7-38

     Figure 7-39 shows the Block, Cbore assembled with hex head screws inserted into the
counterbored holes. SolidWorks will automatically generate the correct size counterbored hole
for a specified screw. The counterbore depth will align the top of the screw head with the top
surface of the part and will define a hole diameter that includes clearance between the fastener
and the hole. In this example a clearance hole with a diameter of Ø.40 was generated. The hole is
.02 larger than the specified .38 fastener diameter.
Figure 7-39

    If clearance is required between the top of the screw and the top surface of the part, check
the Head clearance box under Options in the Hole Specification section of the Hole Wizard
PropertyManager. See Figure 7-40.
Figure 7-40

    The diameter of the counterbored hole can be made larger than the clearance generated by
SolidWorks to allow for tool clearance. Tool clearance allowance increases the diameter of the
counterbore so that it is large enough to allow a socket wrench to fit over the head of the fastener
and still fit within the hole.


Counterbored Hole with Threads
Figure 7-41 shows a 3.00 × 4.00 × 2.00 block with two counterbored holes. Both holes are
threaded.
       1 Create the block.
       2 Click the Hole Wizard tool, select the Straight Tap option, and specify a 3/8-16 UNC
         thread that goes completely through.
       3 Click the Positions tab and locate the hole.
       4 Click the green OK check mark.
    This will locate a 3/8-16 UNC thread hole in the block. Now, we add the counterbore.
  5 Click the top surface of the block and click the Sketch option.
  6 Click the Circle tool and draw a Ø.88 circle on the top surface centered on the same
    centerpoint as the Ø3/8-16 hole.
The dimensions for this example came from Figure 7-38.
Figure 7-41

        7 Click the Features tab, click the Extruded Cut tool, and specify a cut depth of 0.27.
        8 Click the green OK check mark.
        9 Repeat the procedure, adding a second hole with a thread to a depth of 0.85.

 Tip
 For an internal thread, the thread depth is measured from the top surface of the part.



     See Figure 7-42.
Figure 7-42

      10 Save the block as Block, Threads.
      11 Create a new Drawing document and create front and top orthographic views of the
        Block, Threads.
      12 Add centerlines to the front view and add dimensions as shown.
    See Figure 7-43.
      13 Use the Hole Callout tool and click the left threaded hole.
     Do not click the outside of the counterbored hole. This will generate a note that includes
only the counterbore. In Figure 7-42 the callouts 3/8-16 Tapped Hole appear on the front view.
Remove the callouts from view by right-clicking the callouts and selecting the Hide option. The
thread information will be included in the counterbore hole callout.
      14 Locate the text and click the mouse.
     The initial note may show the counterbore callout above the thread callout. Convention calls
for the note to read in the sequence of manufacture. The threaded hole is cut first and then the
counterbore is added; therefore, the thread callout should come before the counterbore callout.
      15 Modify the callout to list the thread callout above the counterbore callout.
    Access the Dimension Text box on the Dimension Manager by clicking the .31 THRU
ALL dimension, delete the first line of text, and replace the dimension with a new dimension,
3/8-16 UNC THRU.
Figure 7-43

       16 Click the green OK check mark.
       17 Click the threaded portion of the right hole.
       18 Locate the text and click the mouse.
       19 Modify the callout as shown.
     Figure 7-44 shows dimensioned counterbored holes using metric units. The Hole Callout
tool was used to dimension the counterbored holes. Note that the hole’s diameter is listed as Ø11.
The fastener size was specified as M10, and the Ø11 hole is a clearance hole.
Figure 7-44


Dimensioning Countersink Holes
Countersink holes are used with flat head screws to create assemblies in which the fasteners do
not protrude above the surfaces.
     Figure 7-45 shows a part with two countersunk holes; one goes completely through, the
other has a depth specification.
Figure 7-45

      1 Draw a 40 × 80 × 60 block.
      2 Use the Hole Wizard tool, click the Countersink type, specify the ANSI Metric
        standard, select an M10 size for a flat head screw, and specify a hole that goes all the
        way through. Define a head clearance of 2.00mm.
      3 Click the Positions tab and position the countersunk hole’s centerpoint as shown using
        the Smart Dimension tool.
      4 Click the green OK check mark.
      5 Click the Hole Wizard tool, click the Countersink type, specify the ANSI Metric
        standard, select an M10 size for a flat head screw, and specify a depth requirement of
        25.00mm for a Blind hole. Define a head clearance of 2.00mm.
      6 Click the Positions tab and locate the hole as shown.
      7 Click the green OK check mark.
      8 Save the drawing as Block, CSink.
Dimensioning the Block
      1 Create a new Drawing document with a front and a top orthographic view of the
        Block, CSink.
      2 Use the Smart Dimension tool and add the appropriate dimensions.
      3 Use the Center Mark tool to add a centerline between the two holes indicating they
        are aligned.
      4 Click the Annotation tab, click the Hole Callout tool, and dimension the two
        countersunk holes.
    See Figure 7-46.




Figure 7-46

7-8 Angular Dimensions
Figure 7-47 shows a model that includes a slanted surface and dimensioned orthographic views
of the model. The dimension values are located beyond the model between two extension lines.
Locating dimensions between extension lines is preferred to locating the value between an
extension line and the edge of the model.
Figure 7-47

    Figure 7-48 shows a shape that includes a slanted surface dimensioned in two different
ways. The shape on the left uses an angular dimension; the one on the right does not. Both are
acceptable.
Figure 7-48

    Figure 7-49 shows two objects dimensioned using angular dimensions. One has an evenly
spaced hole pattern; the other has an uneven hole pattern.
Figure 7-49


Dimensioning an Evenly Spaced Hole Pattern
       1 Start a new drawing of the object and create a view as shown in Figure 7-49.
     The object will automatically include circular centerlines. The circular centerline is called a
bolt circle. Note that the center marks are not horizontal and vertical but point at the centerpoint
of the pattern.
     Circular centerlines and center marks can be created using the Manual Insert Options
located on the Center Mark PropertyManager.
       2 Add dimensions to the pattern and the object.
     The six holes are evenly spaced and are all the same size, so only one angular dimension and
a note are needed, as shown. All the holes are the same distance from the centerpoint, so the
circular centerline needs only one dimension that will include the six holes.
     The size and text position of the angular dimension can be edited using the System tool,
Document Properties, Dimensions, Angle, and entering edits.
     Figure 7-49 shows a similar object but with an uneven hole pattern. Each hole must be
dimensioned separately.
     When the drawing view first appears on the screen, all the center marks are horizontal and
vertical. A circular centerline pattern is preferred. Click each center mark and Hide the mark.
Click the Center Mark tool and the Circular Center Mark tool located under the Manual
Insert Options, and click each hole. A circular centerline pattern will appear. The shape can
then be dimensioned using the circular pattern.

7-9 Ordinate Dimensions
Ordinate dimensions are dimensions based on an XY coordinate system. Ordinate dimensions do
not include extension lines, dimension lines, or arrowheads but simply horizontal and vertical
leader lines drawn directly from the features of the object. Ordinate dimensions are particularly
useful when dimensioning an object that includes many small holes.
     Figure 7-50 shows a part that is to be dimensioned using ordinate dimensions. Ordinate
dimensions’ values are calculated from the XY origin, which, in this example, is the lower-left
corner of the front view of the model.
Figure 7-50


Creating Ordinate Dimensions
See Figure 7-51.
      1 Start a new Drawing document and create a top orthographic view of the part.
    Use the dimensions shown in Figure 7-52 to create the drawing.
      2 Click and extend the center marks and draw centerlines between the four corner holes.
Figure 7-51

      3 Click the arrowhead located under the Smart Dimension tool and click the Horizontal
        Ordinate Dimension option.
      4 Click the lower-left corner of the part to establish the origin for the dimensions.
      5 Move the cursor away from the origin and define a location for the “0” dimension.
   All other horizontal dimensions will align with this location.
      6 Click the lower portion of each hole’s vertical centerline and the lower-right corner of
        the part.
      7 Click the arrowhead located under the Smart Dimension tool and click the Vertical
        Ordinate Dimension option.
      8 Click the lower-left corner of the part to establish the origin for the dimensions.
      9 Click the left portion of each hole’s horizontal centerline and the upper-left corner of
        the part.
     10 Add dimensions for the holes.
   Figure 7-52 shows the dimensioned part.
Figure 7-52

7-10 Baseline Dimensions
Baseline dimensions are a series of dimensions that originate from a common baseline or datum
line. Baseline dimensions are very useful because they help eliminate the tolerance buildup that
is associated with chain-type dimensions.


Creating Baseline Dimensions
See Figure 7-53.
Figure 7-53

       1 Start a new Drawing document and create a top orthographic view of the part.
       2 Use the Linear Center Mark tool and add connection centerlines between the four
         corner holes.
       3 Click the arrowhead under the Smart Dimension tool and click the Baseline
         Dimension option.
       4 Click the left vertical edge of the part and the lower portion of the first vertical
         centerline.
    This will establish the baseline.
       5 Click the lower portion of each vertical centerline and the right vertical edge line and
         locate the dimensions.


Note
The distance between the dimension lines can be changed in the Offset distances box under Dimensions on the Document
Properties tab of the Options tool.
      6 Click the arrowhead under the Smart Dimension tool and click the Baseline
        Dimension option.
      7 Click the lower horizontal edge of the part and the left end of the first horizontal
        centerline.
      8 Click the left end of each horizontal centerline and the right top horizontal edge line.
    The alignment of the vertical dimension lines can be changed by right-clicking the
individual dimension and selecting the Break Alignment option.
      9 Add the hole dimensions.


Hole Tables
Hole tables are a method for dimensioning parts that have large numbers of holes where standard
dimensioning may be cluttered and difficult to read. See Figure 7-54.
Figure 7-54

      1 Start a new Drawing document and create a top orthographic view of the part.
      2 Use the Linear Center Mark tool and add connection centerlines between the four
        corner holes.
      3 Click the Annotation tab, click Tables, and click Hole Table.
      4 Click the lower-left corner of the part to establish an origin.
      5 Click each hole.
   As the holes are clicked they should be listed in the Holes box located in the Hole Table
PropertyManager.
      6 Click the green OK check mark and locate the hole table.
      7 Add the overall dimensions.
      8 Move the hole tags as needed to present a clear, easy-to-read drawing.
    In this example all tags were located to the upper-right of the holes they define. Tables can
be edited using the instructions presented in Section 5-11 for BOMs.
7-11 Locating Dimensions
There are eight general rules concerning the location of dimensions. See Figure 7-55.
Figure 7-55

      1 Locate dimensions near the features they are defining.
      2 Do not locate dimensions on the surface of the object.
      3 Align and group dimensions so that they are neat and easy to understand.
      4 Avoid crossing extension lines.
    Sometimes it is impossible not to cross extension lines because of the complex shape of the
object, but whenever possible, avoid crossing extension lines.
      5 Do not cross dimension lines.
      6 Locate shorter dimensions closer to the object than longer dimensions.
      7 Always locate overall dimensions the farthest away from the object.
      8 Do not dimension the same distance twice. This is called double dimensioning and will
        be discussed in Chapter 8 in association with tolerancing.

7-12 Fillets and Rounds
Fillets and rounds may be dimensioned individually or by a note. In many design situations all
the fillets and rounds are the same size, so a note as shown in Figure 7-56 is used. Any fillets or
rounds that have a different radius from that specified by the note are dimensioned individually.




Figure 7-56

7-13 Rounded Shapes—Internal
Internal rounded shapes are called slots. Figure 7-57 shows three different methods for
dimensioning slots. The end radii are indicated by the note R-2 PLACES, but no numerical
value is given. The width of the slot is dimensioned, and it is assumed that the radius of the
rounded ends is exactly half of the stated width.
Figure 7-57

7-14 Rounded Shapes—External
Figure 7-58 shows two shapes with external rounded ends. As with internal rounded shapes, the
end radii are indicated, but no value is given. The width of the object is given, and the radius of
the rounded end is assumed to be exactly half of the stated width.
Figure 7-58

    The second example shown in Figure 7-58 shows an object dimensioned using the object’s
centerline. This type of dimensioning is done when the distance between the holes is more
important than the overall length of the object; that is, the tolerance for the distance between the
holes is more exact than the tolerance for the overall length of the object.
    The overall length of the object is given as a reference dimension (100). This means the
object will be manufactured based on the other dimensions, and the 100 value will be used only
for reference.
     Objects with partially rounded edges should be dimensioned as shown in Figure 7-58. The
radii of the end features are dimensioned. The centerpoint of the radii is implied to be on the
object centerline. The overall dimension is given; it is not referenced unless specific radii values
are included.

7-15 Irregular Surfaces
There are three different methods for dimensioning irregular surfaces: tabular, baseline, and
baseline with oblique extension lines. Figure 7-59 shows an irregular surface dimensioned using
the tabular method. An XY axis is defined using the edges of the object. Points are then defined
relative to the XY axis. The points are assigned reference numbers, and the reference numbers
and XY coordinate values are listed in chart form as shown.
Figure 7-59

    Figure 7-60 shows an irregular curve dimensioned using baseline dimensions. The baseline
method references all dimensions to specified baselines. Usually there are two baselines, one
horizontal and one vertical.
Figure 7-60

     It is considered poor practice to use a centerline as a baseline. Centerlines are imaginary
lines that do not exist on the object and would make it more difficult to manufacture and inspect
the finished objects.
     Baseline dimensioning is very common because it helps eliminate tolerance buildup and is
easily adaptable to many manufacturing processes.

7-16 Polar Dimensions
Polar dimensions are similar to polar coordinates. A location is defined by a radius (distance)
and an angle. Figure 7-61 shows an object that includes polar dimensions. The holes are located
on a circular centerline, and their positions from the vertical centerline are specified using angles.
Figure 7-61

   Figure 7-62 shows an example of a hole pattern dimensioned using polar dimensions.
Figure 7-62

7-17 Chamfers
Chamfers are angular cuts made on the edges of objects. They are usually used to make it easier
to fit two parts together. They are most often made at 45° angles but may be made at any angle.
Figure 7-63 shows two objects with chamfers between surfaces 90° apart and two examples
between surfaces that are not 90° apart. Either of the two types of dimensions shown for the 45°
dimension may be used. If an angle other than 45° is used, the angle and setback distance must
be specified.
Figure 7-63

    Figure 7-64 shows two examples of internal chamfers. Both define the chamfer using an
angle and diameter. Internal chamfers are very similar to countersunk holes.
Figure 7-64

7-18 Symbols and Abbreviations
Symbols are used in dimensioning to help accurately display the meaning of the dimension.
Symbols also help eliminate language barriers when reading drawings.
     Abbreviations should be used very carefully on drawings. Whenever possible, write out the
full word, including correct punctuation. The Dimension PropertyManager Value tab includes
a group of symbols and words commonly used on technical drawings. Figure 7-65 lists several
standard abbreviations used on technical drawings.
Figure 7-65

       Figure 7-66 shows a list of symbols available in the Dimension PropertyManager Value
tab.
Figure 7-66

 Tip
 To access the Dimension PropertyManager Value tab, click an existing dimension.



    More symbols are available by clicking the More box. A list of available symbols will
appear. Click a new symbol. A preview of the selected symbol will appear. Click OK and the
symbol will appear on the drawing next to the existing symbol.

7-19 Symmetrical and Centerline Symbols
An object is symmetrical about an axis when one side is the exact mirror image of the other.
Figure 7-67 shows a symmetrical object. The symbol of two short parallel lines or the note
OBJECT IS SYMMETRICAL ABOUT THIS AXIS (centerline) may be used to designate
symmetry.
    If an object is symmetrical, only half the object needs to be dimensioned. The other
dimensions are implied by the symmetry note or symbol.
Figure 7-67

     The centerline is slightly different from the axis of symmetry. An object may or may not be
symmetrical about its centerline. See Figure 7-67. Centerlines are used to define the center of
both individual features and entire objects. Use the centerline symbol when a line is a centerline,
but do not use it in place of the symmetry symbol.

7-20 Dimensioning to a Point
Curved surfaces can be dimensioned using theoretical points. See Figure 7-68. There should be a
small gap between the surface of the object and the lines used to define the theoretical point. The
point should be defined by the intersection of at least two lines.
     There should also be a small gap between the extension lines and the theoretical point used
to locate the point.
Figure 7-68

7-21 Dimensioning Section Views
Section views are dimensioned. See Figure 7-69. The section lines should be drawn at an angle
that allows the viewer to clearly distinguish between the section lines and the extension lines.
Figure 7-69

7-22 Dimensioning Orthographic Views
Dimensions should be added to orthographic views where the features appear in contour. Holes
should be dimensioned in their circular views. Figure 7-70 shows three views of an object that
has been dimensioned.
Figure 7-70

     The hole dimensions are added to the top view, where the hole appears circular. The slot is
also dimensioned in the top view because it appears in contour. The slanted surface is
dimensioned in the front view.
     The height of surface A is given in the side view rather than run along extension lines across
the front view. The length of surface A is given in the front view. This is a contour view of the
surface.
     It is considered good practice to keep dimensions in groups. This makes it easier for the
viewer to find dimensions.
     Be careful not to double dimension a distance. A distance should be dimensioned only once.
If a 30 dimension were added above the 25 dimension on the right-side view, it would be an
error. The distance would be double dimensioned: once with the 25 + 30 dimension, and again
with the 55 overall dimension. The 25 + 30 dimensions are mathematically equal to the 55
overall dimension, but there is a distinct difference in how they affect the manufacturing
tolerances. Double dimensions are explained more fully in Chapter 8.


Dimensions Using Centerlines
Figure 7-71 shows an object dimensioned from its centerline. This type of dimensioning is used
when the distance between the holes relative to each other is critical.




Figure 7-71

Chapter Projects

Project 7-1:
Measure and redraw the shapes in Figures P7-1 through P7-24. The dotted grid background has
either .50in. or 10mm spacing. All holes are through holes. Specify the units and scale of the
drawing. Use the Part template to create a model. Use the grid background pattern to determine
the dimensions. Use the Drawing template to create the orthographic view shown. Use the
Smart Dimension tool to dimension the view.
   A. Measure using millimeters.
   B. Measure using inches.
    All dimensions are within either .25in. or 5mm. All fillets and rounds are R.50in., R.25in. or
R10mm, R5mm.




Figure P7-1




Figure P7-2
Figure P7-3
Figure P7-4
Figure P7-5
Figure P7-6
Figure P7-7
Figure P7-8
Figure P7-9
Figure P7-10
Figure P7-11
Figure P7-12
Figure P7-13




Figure P7-14
Figure P7-15
Figure P7-16
Figure P7-17
Figure P7-18
Figure P7-19
Figure P7-20
Figure P7-21
Figure P7-22
Figure P7-23
Figure P7-24

Project 7-2:
Use the Part template to draw models of the objects shown in Figures P7-25 through P7-42.
    1. Create orthographic views of the objects. Dimension the orthographic views.
    2. Create 3D models of the objects. Dimension the 3D models.
Figure P7-25
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-26
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-27
INCHES
Figure P7-28
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-29
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-30
INCHES
Figure P7-31
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-32
INCHES
Figure P7-33
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-34
INCHES
Figure P7-35
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-36
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-37
INCHES
Figure P7-38
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-39
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-40
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-41
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-42
MILLIMETERS

Project 7-3:
   1. Draw a 3D model from the given top orthographic and section views in Figure P7-43.
   2. Draw a top orthographic view and a section view of the object and add dimensions.
Figure P7-43
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-44
MILLIMETERS

Project 7-4:
   1. Draw a 3D model from the given top orthographic and section views in Figure P7-44.
   2. Draw a top orthographic view and a section view of the object and add dimensions.

Project 7-5:
   1. Draw a 3D model from the given top orthographic and section views in Figure P7-45.
   2. Draw a top orthographic view and a section view of the object and add dimensions.

Project 7-6:
   1. Draw a 3D model from the given top orthographic and section views in Figure P7-46.
   2. Draw a top orthographic view and a section view of the object and add dimensions.
Figure P7-45
INCHES
Figure P7-46
INCHES

Project 7-7:
Redraw the given shapes in Figures P7-47 through P7-49 and dimension them using the
following dimension styles.
   1. Baseline
   2. Ordinate
   3. Hole Table
Figure P7-47
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-48
MILLIMETERS
Figure P7-49
INCHES
