Chapter 8. Tolerancing
Chapter Objectives

         Understand tolerance conventions
         Understand the meaning of tolerances
         Apply tolerances
         Understand geometric tolerances
         Understand positional tolerances



8-1 Introduction
Tolerances define the manufacturing limits for dimensions. All dimensions have tolerances
either written directly on the drawing as part of the dimension or implied by a predefined set of
standard tolerances that apply to any dimension that does not have a stated tolerance.
     This chapter explains general tolerance conventions and how they are applied using
SolidWorks. It includes a sample tolerance study and an explanation of standard fits and surface
finishes.

8-2 Direct Tolerance Methods
There are two methods used to include tolerances as part of a dimension: plus and minus, and
limits. Plus and minus tolerances can be expressed in either bilateral (symmetric) or unilateral
(deviation) form.
     A bilateral tolerance has both a plus and a minus value, whereas a unilateral tolerance has
either the plus or the minus value equal to 0. Figure 8-1 shows a horizontal dimension of 60mm
that includes a bilateral tolerance of plus or minus 1 and another dimension of 60.00mm that
includes a bilateral tolerance of plus 0.20 or minus 0.10. Figure 8-1 also shows a dimension of
65mm that includes a unilateral tolerance of plus 1 or minus 0.
Figure 8-1

     Plus or minus tolerances define a range for manufacturing. If inspection shows that all
dimensioned distances on an object fall within their specified tolerance range, the object is
considered acceptable; that is, it has been manufactured correctly.
     A dimension and tolerance of 60 ± 0.1 means that the part must be manufactured within a
range no greater than 60.1 nor less than 59.9. A dimension and tolerance of 65 +1/ − 0 defines
the tolerance range as 65 to 66.
     Figure 8-2 shows some bilateral and unilateral tolerances applied using decimal inch values.
Inch dimensions and tolerances are written using a slightly different format than millimeter
dimensions and tolerances, but they also define manufacturing ranges for dimension values. The
horizontal bilateral dimension and tolerance 2.50 ± .02 defines the longest acceptable distance
as 2.52 inches and the shortest as 2.48. The unilateral dimension 2.50 + .02/ − .00 defines the
longest acceptable distance as 2.52 and the shortest as 2.50.
Figure 8-2

8-3 Tolerance Expressions
Dimension and tolerance values are written differently for inch and millimeter values. See Figure
8-3. Unilateral dimensions for millimeter values specify a zero limit with a single 0. A zero limit
for inch values must include the same number of decimal places given for the dimension value.
In the example shown in Figure 8-3, the dimension value .500 has a unilateral tolerance with
minus zero tolerance. The zero limit is written as .000, three decimal places for both the
dimension and the tolerance.
Figure 8-3

     Both values in a bilateral tolerance for inch values must contain the same number of decimal
places; for millimeter values the tolerance values need not include the same number of decimal
places as the dimension value. In Figure 8-3 the dimension value 32 is accompanied by
tolerances of +0.25 and −0.10. This form is not acceptable for inch dimensions and tolerances.
An equivalent inch dimension and tolerance would be written 32.00 + .25/ − .00.
     Degree values must include the same number of decimal places in both the dimension and
the tolerance values for bilateral tolerances. A single 0 may be used for unilateral tolerances.

8-4 Understanding Plus and Minus Tolerances
A millimeter dimension and tolerance of 12.0 + 0.2/ − 0.1 means that the longest acceptable
distance is 12.2000... 0, and the shortest is 11.9000... 0. The total range is 0.3000... 0.
     After an object is manufactured, it is inspected to ensure that the object has been
manufactured correctly. Each dimensioned distance is measured and, if it is within the specified
tolerance, is accepted. If the measured distance is not within the specified tolerance, the part is
rejected. Some rejected objects may be reworked to bring them into the specified tolerance
range, whereas others are simply scrapped.
     Figure 8-4 shows a dimension with a tolerance. Assume that five objects were manufactured
using the same 12.0 + 0.2/ − 0.1 dimension and tolerance. The objects were then inspected and
the results were as listed. Inspected measurements are usually expressed to at least one more
decimal place than that specified in the tolerance. Which objects are acceptable and which are
not? Object 3 is too long, and object 5 is too short because their measured distances are not
within the specified tolerances.




Figure 8-4

    Figure 8-5 shows a dimension and tolerance of 3.50 ± .02 in. Object 3 is not acceptable
because it is too short, and object 4 is too long.




Figure 8-5
8-5 Creating Plus and Minus Tolerances
Figure 8-6 shows a dimensioned view. This section will show how to add plus and minus to the
existing dimensions.




Figure 8-6

      1 Create a part using the dimensions shown. The part thickness is 0.50.
      2 Save the part as BLOCK, TOL.
      3 Create a Drawing document of the BLOCK, TOL and create an orthographic view as
        shown.
      4 Add dimensions as shown.
    See Figure 8-7.
Figure 8-7

      5 Click the horizontal 2.00 dimension.
      6 Click the arrow in the Tolerance/Precision box as shown.
      7 Select the Bilateral option.
      8 Enter a plus tolerance of 0.02in and a minus tolerance of 0.01in.
   See Figure 8-8.
      9 Click the green OK check mark.
Figure 8-8


Adding Plus and Minus Symmetric Tolerances Using the
Dimension Text Box
See Figure 8-9.
Figure 8-9

       1 Click the vertical 1.13 dimension.
    Note the entry in the Dimension Text box: <DIM>. This represents the existing text value
taken from the part’s construction dimensions.
       2 Move the cursor into the Dimension Text box to the right of the <DIM> notation and
         click the ± symbol.
     Note that the entry in the Dimension Text box now reads <DIM MOD-PM>. This indicates
that the ± symbol has been added to the dimension text.
       3 Type .01 after <MOD-PM>.
       4 Click the green OK check mark.
       5 Save the BLOCK, TOL drawing.
    Note how the dimensions and tolerances have been aligned and moved to create a neat,
uncluttered appearance.

 Tip
 A symmetric tolerance can also be created using the Symmetric option in the Tolerance/Precision box.




8-6 Creating Limit Tolerances
Figure 8-10 shows examples of limit tolerances. Limit tolerances replace dimension values. Two
values are given: the upper and lower limits for the dimension value. The limit tolerance 62.1
and 61.9 is mathematically equal to 62 ± 0.1, but the stated limit tolerance is considered easier
to read and understand.




Figure 8-10

    Limit tolerances define a range for manufacture. Final distances on an object must fall
within the specified range to be acceptable.
    This section uses the BLOCK, TOL drawing created in the previous section. See Figure 8-
11.
        1 Click the vertical 2.25 dimension.
        2 Select the Limit option as shown.
        3 Set the upper limit for 0.02in and the lower limit for 0.01in.
4 Click the green OK check mark.
Figure 8-11

8-7 Creating Angular Tolerances
Figure 8-12 shows an example of an angular dimension with a symmetric tolerance. The
procedures explained for applying different types of tolerances to linear dimensions also apply to
angular dimensions.
Figure 8-12

   See Figure 8-12.
      1 Draw the part shown in Figure 8-12. Extrude the part to a thickness of .50.
      2 Save the part as BLOCK, ANGLE.
      3 Create a Drawing document of the BLOCK, ANGLE and create an orthographic view
        as shown.
      4 Dimension the view.
      5 Click the 45.00° dimension.
      6 Select the Symmetric option.
      7 Enter a value of .02.
      8 Click the green OK check mark.
      9 Save the drawing.

8-8 Standard Tolerances
Most manufacturers establish a set of standard tolerances that are applied to any dimension that
does not include a specific tolerance. Figure 8-13 shows some possible standard tolerances.
Standard tolerances vary from company to company. Standard tolerances are usually listed on
the first page of a drawing to the left of the title block, but this location may vary.




Figure 8-13

     The X value used when specifying standard tolerances means any X stated in that format. A
dimension value of 52.00 would have an implied tolerance of ±.01 because the stated standard
tolerance is . XX ± .01. Thus, any dimension value with two decimal places has a standard
implied tolerance of ±.01. A dimension value of 52.000 would have an implied tolerance of
±.001.

8-9 Double-Dimensioning Errors
It is an error to dimension the same distance twice. This mistake is called double dimensioning.
Double dimensioning is an error because it does not allow for tolerance buildup across a
distance.
      Figure 8-14 shows an object that has been dimensioned twice across its horizontal length,
once using three 30mm dimensions and a second time using the 90mm overall dimension. The
two dimensions are mathematically equal but are not equal when tolerances are considered.
Assume that each dimension has a standard tolerance of ±1 mm. The three 30mm dimensions
could create an acceptable distance of 90 ± 3 mm, or a maximum distance of 93 and a minimum
distance of 87. The overall dimension of 90mm allows a maximum distance of 91 and a
minimum distance of 89. The two dimensions yield different results when tolerances are
considered.
Figure 8-14

     The size and location of a tolerance depend on the design objectives of the object, how it
will be manufactured, and how it will be inspected. Even objects that have similar shapes may be
dimensioned and toleranced very differently.
     One possible solution to the double dimensioning shown in Figure 8-14 is to remove one of
the 30mm dimensions and allow that distance to “float,” that is, absorb the cumulated tolerances.
The choice of which 30mm dimension to eliminate depends on the design objectives of the part.
For this example the far-right dimension was eliminated to remove the double-dimensioning
error.
     Another possible solution to the double-dimensioning error is to retain the three 30mm
dimensions and to change the 90mm overall dimension to a reference dimension. A reference
dimension is used only for mathematical convenience. It is not used during the manufacturing or
inspection process. A reference dimension is designated on a drawing using parentheses: (90).
     If the 90mm dimension was referenced, then only the three 30mm dimensions would be
used to manufacture and inspect the object. This would eliminate the double-dimensioning error.

8-10 Chain Dimensions and Baseline Dimensions
There are two systems for applying dimensions and tolerances to a drawing: chain and baseline.
Figure 8-15 shows examples of both systems. Chain dimensions dimension each feature to the
feature next to it. Baseline dimensions dimension all features from a single baseline or datum.
Figure 8-15

     Chain and baseline dimensions may be used together. Figure 8-15 also shows two objects
with repetitive features; one object includes two slots, and the other includes three sets of three
holes. In each example, the center of the repetitive feature is dimensioned to the left side of the
object, which serves as a baseline. The sizes of the individual features are dimensioned using
chain dimensions referenced to centerlines.
     Baseline dimensions eliminate tolerance buildup and can be related directly to the reference
axis of many machines. They tend to take up much more area on a drawing than do chain
dimensions.
     Chain dimensions are useful in relating one feature to another, such as the repetitive hole
pattern shown in Figure 8-15. In this example the distance between the holes is more important
than the individual hole’s distance from the baseline.
     Figure 8-16 shows the same object dimensioned twice, once using chain dimensions and
once using baseline dimensions. All distances are assigned a tolerance range of 2mm using limit
tolerances. The maximum distance for surface A is 28mm using the chain system and 27mm
using the baseline system. The 1mm difference comes from the elimination of the first 26–24
limit dimension found on the chain example but not on the baseline.
Figure 8-16

     The total tolerance difference is 6mm for the chain dimensions and 4mm for the baseline
dimensions. The baseline method reduces the tolerance variations for the object simply because
it applies the tolerances and dimensions differently. So why not always use baseline dimensions?
For most applications, the baseline system is probably better, but if the distance between the
individual features is more critical than the distance from the feature to the baseline, use the
chain system.


Baseline Dimensions
See Figure 8-17. See also Chapter 7, “Dimensioning.”
Figure 8-17

     Note in the example of baseline dimensioning shown in Figure 8-17 that each dimension is
independent of the other. This means that if one of the dimensions is manufactured incorrectly, it
will not affect the other dimensions.

8-11 Tolerance Studies
The term tolerance study is used when analyzing the effects of a group of tolerances on one
another and on an object. Figure 8-18 shows an object with two horizontal dimensions. The
horizontal distance A is not dimensioned. Its length depends on the tolerances of the two
horizontal dimensions.
Figure 8-18


Calculating the Maximum Length of A
Distance A will be longest when the overall distance is at its longest and the other distance is at
its shortest.
                                                 65.2
                                               −29.8
                                              ¯¯¯¯¯35.4
                                                   ¯¯¯¯¯¯


Calculating the Minimum Length of A
Distance A will be shortest when the overall length is at its shortest and the other length is at its
longest.
                                            64.9
                                          −30.1
                                         ¯¯¯¯¯34.8
                                              ¯¯¯¯¯¯


8-12 Rectangular Dimensions
Figure 8-19 shows an example of rectangular dimensions referenced to baselines. Figure 8-20
shows a circular object on which dimensions are referenced to a circle’s centerlines.
Dimensioning to a circle’s centerline is critical to accurate hole location.




Figure 8-19
Figure 8-20

8-13 Hole Locations
When rectangular dimensions are used, the location of a hole’s centerpoint is defined by two
linear dimensions. The result is a rectangular tolerance zone whose size is based on the linear
dimension’s tolerances. The shape of the centerpoint’s tolerance zone may be changed to circular
using positioning tolerancing, as described later in the chapter.
     Figure 8-21 shows the location and size dimensions for a hole. Also shown are the resulting
tolerance zone and the overall possible hole shape. The centerpoint’s tolerance is .2 by .3 based
on the given linear locating tolerances.
Figure 8-21


 Note
 Linear tolerances generate a square or rectangular tolerance zone.



     The hole diameter has a tolerance of ±.05. This value must be added to the centerpoint
location tolerances to define the maximum overall possible shape of the hole. The maximum
possible hole shape is determined by drawing the maximum radius from the four corner points of
the tolerance zone.
     This means that the left edge of the hole could be as close to the vertical baseline as 12.75 or
as far as 13.25. The 12.75 value was derived by subtracting the maximum hole diameter value
12.05 from the minimum linear distance 24.80 (24.80 − 12.05 = 12.75). The 13.25 value was
derived by subtracting the minimum hole diameter 11.95 from the maximum linear distance
25.20 (25.20 − 11.95 = 13.25).


 Note
 The hole locations can also be defined using polar dimensions.
    Figure 8-22 shows a hole’s tolerance zone based on polar dimensions. The zone has a sector
shape, and the possible hole shape is determined by locating the maximum radius at the four
corner points of the tolerance zone.




Figure 8-22

8-14 Choosing a Shaft for a Toleranced Hole
Given the hole location and size shown in Figure 8-21, what is the largest diameter shaft that will
always fit into the hole?
     Figure 8-23 shows the hole’s centerpoint tolerance zone based on the given linear locating
tolerances. Four circles have been drawn centered at the four corners on the linear tolerance zone
that represents the smallest possible hole diameter. The circles define an area that represents the
maximum shaft size that will always fit into the hole, regardless of how the given dimensions are
applied.
Figure 8-23

    The diameter size of this circular area can be calculated by subtracting the maximum
diagonal distance across the linear tolerance zone (corner to corner) from the minimum hole
diameter.
    The results can be expressed as a formula.


For Linear Dimensions and Tolerances
                                   Smax = Hmin − DTZ
where
     Smax = maximum shaft diameter
     Hmin = minimum hole diameter
     DTZ = diagonal distance across the tolerance zone
    In the example shown the diagonal distance is determined using the Pythagorean theorem:
                                   DTZ = √(.4)2 + (.6)2
                                       = √.16 + .36
                                   DTZ = .72
    This means that the maximum shaft diameter that will always fit into the given hole is 11.43:
                                     Smax = Hmin − DTZ
                                          = 11.95 − .72
                                     Smax = 11.23
     This procedure represents a restricted application of the general formula presented later in
the chapter for positioning tolerances.
     Once the maximum shaft size has been established, a tolerance can be applied to the shaft. If
the shaft had a total tolerance of .25, the minimum shaft diameter would be 11.43 − .25, or
11.18. Figure 8-23 shows a shaft dimensioned and toleranced using these values.
     The formula presented is based on the assumption that the shaft is perfectly placed on the
hole’s centerpoint. This assumption is reasonable if two objects are joined by a fastener and both
objects are free to move. When both objects are free to move about a common fastener, they are
called floating objects.

8-15 Sample Problem SP8-1
Parts A and B in Figure 8-24 are to be joined by a common shaft. The total tolerance for the shaft
is to be .05. What are the maximum and minimum shaft diameters?
Figure 8-24

    Both objects have the same dimensions and tolerances and are floating relative to each other.
                                    Smax = Hmin − DTZ
                                         = 15.93 − .85
                                    Smax = 15.08
     The shaft’s minimum diameter is found by subtracting the total tolerance requirement from
the calculated maximum diameter:
                                     15.08 − .05 = 15.03
    Therefore,
     Shaft max = 15.08
     Shaft min = 15.03

8-16 Sample Problem SP8-2
The procedure presented in Sample Problem SP8-1 can be worked in reverse to determine the
maximum and minimum hole size based on a given shaft size.
    Objects AA and BB as shown in Figure 8-25 are to be joined using a bolt whose maximum
diameter is .248. What is the minimum hole size for objects that will always accept the bolt?
What is the maximum hole size if the total hole tolerance is .005?
                                     Smax = Hmin − DTZ




Figure 8-25

    In this example Hmin is the unknown factor, so the equation is rewritten as
                                    Hmin = Smax + DTZ
                                    Hmin = .248 + .001
                                    Hmin = .249
    This is the minimum hole diameter, so the total tolerance requirement is added to this value:
                                      .249 + .005 = .254
    Therefore,
      Hole max = .254
      Hole min = .249

8-17 Nominal Sizes
The term nominal refers to the approximate size of an object that matches a common fraction or
whole number. A shaft with a dimension of 1.500 + .003 is said to have a nominal size of “one
and a half inches.” A dimension of 1.500 + .000/ − .005 is still said to have a nominal size of
one and a half inches. In both examples 1.5 is the closest common fraction.

8-18 Standard Fits (Metric Values)
Calculating tolerances between holes and shafts that fit together is so common in engineering
design that a group of standard values and notations has been established. These values may be
calculated using the Limits and Fits option of the Design Library.
     There are three possible types of fits between a shaft and a hole: clearance, transitional, and
interference. There are several subclassifications within each of these categories.
     A clearance fit always defines the maximum shaft diameter as smaller than the minimum
hole diameter. The difference between the two diameters is the amount of clearance. It is
possible for a clearance fit to be defined with zero clearance; that is, the maximum shaft diameter
is equal to the minimum hole diameter.
     An interference fit always defines the minimum shaft diameter as larger than the maximum
hole diameter; that is, the shaft is always bigger than the hole. This definition means that an
interference fit is the converse of a clearance fit. The difference between the diameter of the shaft
and the hole is the amount of interference.
     An interference fit is primarily used to assemble objects together. Interference fits eliminate
the need for threads, welds, or other joining methods. Using an interference for joining two
objects is generally limited to light load applications.
     It is sometimes difficult to visualize how a shaft can be assembled into a hole with a
diameter smaller than that of the shaft. It is sometimes done using a hydraulic press that slowly
forces the two parts together. The joining process can be augmented by the use of lubricants or
heat. The hole is heated, causing it to expand, the shaft is inserted, and the hole is allowed to cool
and shrink around the shaft.
     A transition fit may be either a clearance or an interference fit. It may have a clearance
between the shaft and the hole or an interference.
     The notations are based on Standard International Tolerance values. A specific description
for each category of fit follows.


Clearance Fits
       H11/c11 or C11/h11 = loose running fit
       H8/d8 or D8/h8 = free running fit
       H8/f7 or F8/h7 = close running fit
       H7/g6 or G7/h6 = sliding fit
       H7/h6 = locational clearance fit


Transitional Fits
       H7/k6 or K7/h6 = locational transition fit
       H7/n6 or N7/h6 = locational transition fit


Interference Fits
       H7/p6 or P7/h6 = locational transition fit
       H7/s6 or S7/h6 = medium drive fit
       H7/u6 or U7/h6 = force fit

8-19 Standard Fits (Inch Values)
Inch values are accessed in the Design Library by selecting the ANSI-Inch standards.
    Fits defined using inch values are classified as follows:
       RC     = running and sliding fits
       LC     = localtional clearance fits
       LT     = locational transition fits
       LN     = interference fits
       FN     = force fits
     Each of these general categories has several subclassifications within it defined by a number,
for example, Class RC1, Class RC2, through Class RC8. The letter designations are based on
International Tolerance Standards, as are metric designations.

 Tip
 Charts of tolerance values can be found in the appendix.




Adding a Fit Callout to a Drawing
Figure 8-26 shows a block and post. Figure 8-27 shows a drawing containing a front and a top
orthographic view of the block and post assembly.
1 Draw the block and post and create an assembly drawing as shown in Figure 8-26.
Figure 8-26
Figure 8-27

      2 Draw a front and a top orthographic view of the assembly as shown.
      3 Add a Ø.50 dimension to the top view.
      4 Click the Ø.50 dimension.
   The Dimension Value PropertyManager will appear. See Figure 8-28.
      5 Select the Fit option from the Tolerance/Precision box as shown.
      6 Select an H5 tolerance for the hole.
      7 Select the g4 tolerance for the shaft.
      8 Change the number of decimal places in the Ø.50 dimension to four places, Ø.5000.
      9 Click the green OK check mark.
Figure 8-28


Reading Fit Tables
There are several fit tables in the appendix for both English units and metric units. The metric
tables can be read directly, as they state hole and shaft dimension. For example, the tolerance for
a Preferred Clearance Fit for a 10mm nominal hole using a loose running fit is 10.090/10.000 for
the hole and 9.920/9.830 for the shaft. The tolerance callout would be H11/c11. English unit
tables require interpretation.
     Figure 8-29 shows the table values for a .5000 nominal hole using an H5/g4 tolerance. The
tolerance values are in thousandths of an inch; that is, a listed value of 0.25 equals 0.0025in. The
Ø.5000 nominal value is in the 0.40–0.71 size range, so the tolerance values are as shown. These
values can be applied to the detail drawings of the block and shaft. See Figure 8-30.
Figure 8-29
Figure 8-30

8-20 Preferred and Standard Sizes
It is important that designers always consider preferred and standard sizes when selecting sizes
for designs. Most tooling is set up to match these sizes, so manufacturing is greatly simplified
when preferred and standard sizes are specified. Figure 8-31 shows a listing of preferred sizes for
metric values.
Figure 8-31

     Consider the case of design calculations that call for a 42mm diameter hole. A 42mm
diameter hole is not a preferred size. A diameter of 40mm is the closest preferred size, and a
45mm diameter is a second choice. A 42mm hole could be manufactured but would require an
unusual drill size that might not be available. It would be wise to reconsider the design to see if a
40mm diameter hole could be used, and if not, possibly a 45mm diameter hole.
     A production run of a very large quantity could possibly justify the cost of special tooling,
but for smaller runs it is probably better to use preferred sizes. Machinists will have the required
drills, and maintenance people will have the appropriate tools for these sizes.
     Figure 8-32 shows a listing of standard fractional drill sizes. Most companies now specify
metric units or decimal inches; however, many standard items are still available in fractional
sizes, and many older objects may still require fractional-sized tools and replacement parts. A
more complete listing is available in the appendix.
Figure 8-32

8-21 Surface Finishes
The term surface finish refers to the accuracy (flatness) of a surface. Metric values are measured
using micrometers (μm), and inch values are measured in microinches (μin).
     The accuracy of a surface depends on the manufacturing process used to produce the
surface. Figure 8-33 shows a listing of manufacturing processes and the quality of the surface
finish they can be expected to produce.
Figure 8-33

     Surface finishes have several design applications. Datum surfaces, or surfaces used for
baseline dimensioning, should have fairly accurate surface finishes to help assure accurate
measurements. Bearing surfaces should have good-quality surface finishes for better load
distribution, and parts that operate at high speeds should have smooth finishes to help reduce
friction. Figure 8-34 shows a screw head sitting on a very wavy surface. Note that the head of the
screw is actually in contact with only two wave peaks, which means that the entire bearing load
is concentrated on the two peaks. This situation could cause stress cracks and greatly weaken the
surface. A better-quality surface finish would increase the bearing contact area.
Figure 8-34

     Figure 8-34 also shows two very rough surfaces moving in contact with each other. The
result will be excess wear to both surfaces because the surfaces touch only on the peaks, and
these peaks will tend to wear faster than flatter areas. Excess vibration can also result when
interfacing surfaces are too rough.
     Surface finishes are classified into three categories: surface texture, roughness, and lay.
Surface texture is a general term that refers to the overall quality and accuracy of a surface.
     Roughness is a measure of the average deviation of a surface’s peaks and valleys. See Figure
8-35.




Figure 8-35

     Lay refers to the direction of machine marks on a surface. See Figure 8-35. The lay of a
surface is particularly important when two moving objects are in contact with each other,
especially at high speeds.

8-22 Surface Control Symbols
Surface finishes are indicated on a drawing using surface control symbols. See Figure 8-36. The
general surface control symbol looks like a check mark. Roughness values may be included with
the symbol to specify the required accuracy. Surface control symbols can also be used to specify
the manufacturing process that may or may not be used to produce a surface.
Figure 8-36

     Figure 8-37 shows two applications of surface control symbols. In the first example, a 0.8-
μm (32μin) surface finish is specified on the surface that serves as a datum for several horizontal
dimensions. A 0.8-μm surface finish is generally considered the minimum acceptable finish for
datums.
     A second finish mark with a value of 0.4μm is located on an extension line that refers to a
surface that will be in contact with a moving object. The extra flatness will help prevent wear
between the two surfaces.
Figure 8-37

8-23 Applying Surface Control Symbols
Figure 8-38 shows a dimensioned orthographic view. Surface symbols will be added to this view.
      1 Click the Annotation tab and select the Surface Finish tool.
Figure 8-38

   See Figure 8-39.
      2 Select the Basic symbol and enter a value of 32.
      3 Move the cursor into the drawing area and locate the surface control symbol on an
        extension line as shown.
      4 Press the <Esc> key.
      5 Click the green OK check mark.
      6 Save the drawing.
Figure 8-39


Adding a Lay Symbol to a Drawing
Use the same drawing as in Figure 8-39.
      1 Click the Annotation tab and select the Surface Finish tool.
    See Figure 8-40.
      2 Click the Machining Required symbol box.
      3 Click the Lay Direction box and select the Multi-Directional option.
Figure 8-40

       4 Move the cursor into the drawing area and locate the surface control symbol on an
         extension line as shown.
       5 Press the <Esc> key.
       6 Click the green OK check mark.

8-24 Design Problems
Figure 8-41 shows two objects that are to be fitted together using a fastener such as a screw-and-
nut combination. For this example a cylinder will be used to represent a fastener. Only two
nominal dimensions are given. The dimensions and tolerances were derived as follows.
Figure 8-41

      The distance between the centers of the holes is given as 50 nominal. The term nominal
means that the stated value is only a starting point. The final dimensions will be close to the
given value but do not have to equal it.
      Assigning tolerances is an iteration process; that is, a tolerance is selected and other
tolerance values are calculated from the selected initial values. If the results are not satisfactory,
go back and modify the initial value and calculate the other values again. As your experience
grows you will become better at selecting realistic initial values.
      In the example shown in Figure 8-41, start by assigning a tolerance of ±.01 to both the top
and bottom parts for both the horizontal and vertical dimensions used to locate the holes. This
means that there is a possible centerpoint variation of .02 for both parts. The parts must always
fit together, so tolerances must be assigned based on the worst-case condition, or when the parts
are made at the extreme ends of the assigned tolerances.
      Figure 8-42 shows a greatly enlarged picture of the worst-case condition created by a
tolerance of ±.01. The centerpoints of the holes could be as much as .028 apart if the two
centerpoints were located at opposite corners of the tolerance zones. This means that the
minimum hole diameter must always be at least .028 larger than the maximum stud diameter. In
addition, there should be a clearance tolerance assigned so that the hole and stud are never
exactly the same size. Figure 8-43 shows the resulting tolerances.
 Tip
 The tolerance zones in this section are created by line dimensions that generated square tolerance zones.




Figure 8-42
Figure 8-43


Floating Condition
The top and bottom parts shown in Figure 8-41 are to be joined by two independent fasteners;
that is, the location of one fastener does not depend on the location of the other. This situation is
called a floating condition.
     This means that the tolerance zones for both the top and bottom parts can be assigned the
same values and that a fastener diameter selected to fit one part will also fit the other part.
     The final tolerances were developed by first defining a minimum hole size of 20.00. An
arbitrary tolerance of .02 was assigned to the hole and was expressed as 20.00 1.02/20, so the
hole can never be any smaller than 20.00.
     The 20.00 minimum hole diameter dictates that the maximum fastener diameter can be no
greater than 19.97, or .03 (the rounded-off diagonal distance across the tolerance zone—.028)
less than the minimum hole diameter. A .01 clearance was assigned. The clearance ensures that
the hole and fastener are never exactly the same diameter. The resulting maximum allowable
diameter for the fastener is 19.96. Again, an arbitrary tolerance of .02 was assigned to the
fastener. The final fastener dimensions are therefore 19.96 to 19.94.
     The assigned tolerances ensure that there will always be at least .01 clearance between the
fastener and the hole. The other extreme condition occurs when the hole is at its largest possible
size (20.02) and the fastener is at its smallest (19.94). This means that there could be as much as
.08 clearance between the parts. If this much clearance is not acceptable, then the assigned
tolerances will have to be reevaluated.
     Figure 8-44 shows the top and bottom parts dimensioned and toleranced. Any dimensions
that do not have assigned tolerances are assumed to have standard tolerances.
Figure 8-44

     Note, in Figure 8-44, that the top edge of each part has been assigned a surface finish. This
was done to help ensure the accuracy of the 20 ± .01 dimension. If this edge surface were rough,
it could affect the tolerance measurements.
     This example will be done later in the chapter using geometric tolerances. Geometric
tolerance zones are circular rather than rectangular.


Fixed Condition
Figure 8-45 shows the same nominal conditions presented in Figure 8-41, but the fasteners are
now fixed to the top part. This situation is called the fixed condition. In analyzing the tolerance
zones for the fixed condition, two positional tolerances must be considered: the positional
tolerances for the holes in the bottom part, and the positional tolerances for the fixed fasteners in
the top part. This relationship may be expressed in an equation, as follows:
Figure 8-45

                                Smax + DTSZ = Hmin − DTZ
where
     Smax = maximum shaft (fastener) diameter
     Hmin = minimum hole diameter
     DTSZ = diagonal distance across the shaft 's centerpoint tolerance zone
     DTZ = diagonal distance across the hole 's centerpoint tolerance zone
    If a dimension and tolerance of 50 ± .01 is assigned to both the center distance between the
holes and the center distance between the fixed fasteners, the values for DTSZ and DTZ will be
equal. The formula can then be simplified as follows.
                                   Smax = Hmin − 2 (DTZ)
where DTZ equals the diagonal distance across the tolerance zone. If a hole tolerance of
20.00 + .02/ − 0 also is defined, the resulting maximum shaft size can be determined, assuming
that the calculated distance of .028 is rounded off to .03. See Figure 8-46.
                                    Smax = 20.00 − 2 (0.03)
                                         = 19.94




Figure 8-46

     This means that 19.94 is the largest possible shaft diameter that will fit without interference.
If a clearance tolerance of .01 is assumed to ensure that the shaft and hole are never exactly the
same size, the maximum shaft diameter becomes 19.93. See Figure 8-47.
Figure 8-47

    A feature tolerance of .02 on the shaft will result in a minimum shaft diameter of 19.91.
Note that the .01 clearance tolerance and the .02 feature tolerance were arbitrarily chosen. Other
values could have been used.


Designing a Hole Given a Fastener Size
The previous two examples started by selecting a minimum hole diameter and then calculating
the resulting fastener size. Figure 8-48 shows a situation in which the fastener size is defined,
and the problem is to determine the appropriate hole sizes. Figure 8-49 shows the dimensions
and tolerances for both top and bottom parts.
Figure 8-48

   Requirements:
     Clearance , minimum = .003
     Hole tolerances = .005
     Positional tolerance = .002
Figure 8-49

8-25 Geometric Tolerances
Geometric tolerancing is a dimensioning and tolerancing system based on the geometric shape of
an object. Surfaces may be defined in terms of their flatness or roundness, or in terms of how
perpendicular or parallel they are to other surfaces.
     Geometric tolerances allow a more exact definition of the shape of an object than do
conventional coordinate-type tolerances. Objects can be toleranced in a manner more closely
related to their design function or so that their features and surfaces are more directly related to
each other.

8-26 Tolerances of Form
Tolerances of form are used to define the shape of a surface relative to itself. There are four
classifications: flatness, straightness, roundness, and cylindricity. Tolerances of form are not
related to other surfaces but apply only to an individual surface.

8-27 Flatness
Flatness tolerances are used to define the amount of variation permitted in an individual surface.
The surface is thought of as a plane not related to the rest of the object.
     Figure 8-50 shows a rectangular object. How flat is the top surface? The given plus or minus
tolerances allow a variation of (±0.5) across the surface. Without additional tolerances the
surface could look like a series of waves varying between 30.5 and 29.5.




Figure 8-50
     If the example in Figure 8-50 was assigned a flatness tolerance of 0.3, the height of the
object—the feature tolerance—could continue to vary based on the 30 ± 0.5 tolerance, but the
surface itself could not vary by more than 0.3. In the most extreme condition, one end of the
surface could be 30.5 above the bottom surface and the other end 29.5, but the surface would still
be limited to within two parallel planes 0.3 apart as shown.
     To better understand the meaning of flatness, consider how the surface would be inspected.
The surface would be acceptable if a gauge could be moved all around the surface and never vary
by more than 0.3. See Figure 8-51. Every point in the plane must be within the specified
tolerance.




Figure 8-51

8-28 Straightness
Straightness tolerances are used to measure the variation of an individual feature along a straight
line in a specified direction. Figure 8-52 shows an object with a straightness tolerance applied to
its top surface. Straightness differs from flatness because straightness measurements are checked
by moving a gauge directly across the surface in a single direction. The gauge is not moved
randomly about the surface, as is required by flatness.
Figure 8-52

     Straightness tolerances are most often applied to circular or matching objects to help ensure
that the parts are not barreled or warped within the given feature tolerance range and, therefore,
do not fit together well. Figure 8-53 shows a cylindrical object dimensioned and toleranced using
a standard feature tolerance. The surface of the cylinder may vary within the specified tolerance
range as shown.
Figure 8-53

     Figure 8-54 shows the same object shown in Figure 8-53 dimensioned and toleranced using
the same feature tolerance but also including a 0.05 straightness tolerance. The straightness
tolerance limits the surface variation to 0.05 as shown.
Figure 8-54

8-29 Straightness (RFS and MMC)
Figure 8-55 again shows the same cylinder shown in Figures 8-53 and 8-54. This time the
straightness tolerance is applied about the cylinder’s centerline. This type of tolerance permits
the feature tolerance and geometric tolerance to be used together to define a virtual condition. A
virtual condition is used to determine the maximum possible size variation of the cylinder or the
smallest diameter hole that will always accept the cylinder.
Figure 8-55

      The geometric tolerance specified in Figure 8-55 is applied to any circular segment along the
cylinder, regardless of the cylinder’s diameter. This means that the 0.05 tolerance is applied
equally when the cylinder’s diameter measures 19 or when it measures 21. This application is
called RFS, regardless of feature size. RFS condition applies if no material condition is
specified. In Figure 8-55 no symbol is listed after the 0.05 value, so it is assumed to be applied
RFS.
      Figure 8-56 shows the cylinder dimensioned with an MMC condition applied to the
straightness tolerance. MMC stands for maximum material condition and means that the
specified straightness tolerance (0.05) is applied only at the MMC condition or when the cylinder
is at its maximum diameter size (21).
Figure 8-56

     A shaft is an external feature, so its largest possible size or MMC occurs when it is at its
maximum diameter. A hole is an internal feature. A hole’s MMC condition occurs when it is at
its smallest diameter. The MMC condition for holes will be discussed later in the chapter along
with positional tolerances.
     Applying a straightness tolerance at MMC allows for a variation in the resulting tolerance
zone. Because the 0.05 flatness tolerance is applied at MMC, the virtual condition is still 21.05,
the same as with the RFS condition; however, the tolerance is applied only at MMC. As the
cylinder’s diameter varies within the specified feature tolerance range the acceptable tolerance
zone may vary to maintain the same virtual condition.
     The table in Figure 8-56 shows how the tolerance zone varies as the cylinder’s diameter
varies. When the cylinder is at its largest size or MMC, the tolerance zone equals 0.05, or the
specified flatness variation. When the cylinder is at its smallest diameter, the tolerance zone
equals 2.05, or the total feature size plus the total flatness size. In all variations the virtual size
remains the same, so at any given cylinder diameter value, the size of the tolerance zone can be
determined by subtracting the cylinder’s diameter value from the virtual condition.


 Note
 Geometric tolerance applied at MMC allows the tolerance zone to grow.


     Figure 8-57 shows a comparison between different methods used to dimension and tolerance
a .750 shaft. The first example uses only a feature tolerance. This tolerance sets an upper limit of
.755 and a lower limit of .745. Any variations within that range are acceptable.
Figure 8-57

     The second example in Figure 8-57 sets a straightness tolerance of .003 about the cylinder’s
centerline. No conditions are defined, so the tolerance is applied RFS. This limits the variations
in straightness to .003 at all feature sizes. For example, when the shaft is at its smallest possible
feature size of .745, the .003 still applies. This means that a shaft measuring .745 that had a
straightness variation greater than .003 would be rejected. If the tolerance had been applied at
MMC, the part would be accepted. This does not mean that straightness tolerances should always
be applied at MMC. If straightness is critical to the design integrity or function of the part, then
straightness should be applied in the RFS condition.
     The third example in Figure 8-57 applies the straightness tolerance about the centerline at
MMC. This tolerance creates a virtual condition of .758. The MMC condition allows the
tolerance to vary as the feature tolerance varies, so when the shaft is at its smallest feature size,
.745, a straightness tolerance of .003 is acceptable (.005 feature tolerance +.003 straightness
tolerance).
     If the tolerance specification for the cylinder shown in Figure 8-57 was 0.000 applied at
MMC, it would mean that the shaft would have to be perfectly straight at MMC or when the
shaft was at its maximum value (.755); however, the straightness tolerance can vary as the
feature size varies, as discussed for the other tolerance conditions. A 0.000 tolerance means that
the MMC and the virtual conditions are equal.
     Figure 8-58 shows a very long .750 diameter shaft. Its straightness tolerance includes a
length qualifier that serves to limit the straightness variations over each inch of the shaft length
and to prevent excess waviness over the full length. The tolerance .002/1.000 means that the total
straightness may vary over the entire length of the shaft by .003 but that the variation is limited
to .002 per 1.000 of shaft length.




Figure 8-58

8-30 Circularity
A circularity tolerance is used to limit the amount of variation in the roundness of a surface of
revolution. It is measured at individual cross sections along the length of the object. The
measurements are limited to the individual cross sections and are not related to other cross
sections. This means that in extreme conditions the shaft shown in Figure 8-59 could actually
taper from a diameter of 21 to a diameter of 19 and never violate the circularity requirement. It
also means that qualifications such as MMC cannot be applied.
Figure 8-59

     Figure 8-59 shows a shaft that includes a feature tolerance and a circularity tolerance of
0.07. To understand circularity tolerances, consider an individual cross section or slice of the
cylinder. The actual shape of the outside edge of the slice varies around the slice. The difference
between the maximum diameter and the minimum diameter of the slice can never exceed the
stated circularity tolerance.
     Circularity tolerances can be applied to tapered sections and spheres, as shown in Figure 8-
60. In both applications, circularity is measured around individual cross sections, as it was for the
shaft shown in Figure 8-59.
Figure 8-60

8-31 Cylindricity
Cylindricity tolerances are used to define a tolerance zone both around individual circular cross
sections of an object and also along its length. The resulting tolerance zone looks like two
concentric cylinders.
     Figure 8-61 shows a shaft that includes a cylindricity tolerance that establishes a tolerance
zone of .007. This means that if the maximum measured diameter is determined to be .755, the
minimum diameter cannot be less than .748 anywhere on the cylindrical surface. Cylindricity
and circularity are somewhat analogous to flatness and straightness. Flatness and cylindricity are
concerned with variations across an entire surface or plane. In the case of cylindricity, the plane
is shaped like a cylinder. Straightness and circularity are concerned with variations of a single
element of a surface: a straight line across the plane in a specified direction for straightness, and
a path around a single cross section for circularity.
Figure 8-61

8-32 Geometric Tolerances Using SolidWorks
Geometric tolerances are tolerances that limit dimensional variations based on the geometric
properties. Figure 8-62 shows three different ways geometric tolerance boxes can be added to a
drawing.




Figure 8-62

    Figure 8-63 shows lists of geometric tolerance symbols.
Figure 8-63

8-33 Datums
A datum is a point, axis, or surface used as a starting reference point for dimensions and
tolerances. Figure 8-64 and Figure 8-65 show a rectangular object with three datum planes
labeled A, B, and C. The three datum planes are called the primary, secondary, and tertiary
datums, respectively. The three datum planes are, by definition, exactly 90° to one another.
Figure 8-64

    Figure 8-66 shows a cylindrical datum frame that includes three datum planes. The X and Y
planes are perpendicular to each other, and the base A plane is perpendicular to the datum axis
between the X and Y planes.
Figure 8-65
Figure 8-66

    Datum planes are assumed to be perfectly flat. When assigning a datum status to a surface,
be sure that the surface is reasonably flat. This means that datum surfaces should be toleranced
using surface finishes or created using machine techniques that produce flat surfaces.


Adding a Datum Indicator
Figure 8-67 shows a dimensioned orthographic view. This section shows how to define the lower
surface as a datum feature, datum A. Note that a surface finish of 16 has been added to the lower
surface. Datum surfaces are assumed to be flat and smooth.
Figure 8-67

        1 Click the Annotation tab and select the Datum Feature tool.
    The Datum Feature PropertyManager will appear.
        2 Enter the letter A in the Label Settings field and select the Filled Triangle With
          Shoulder option under Leader.
        3 Locate the datum symbol on the drawing as shown.
        4 Press the <Esc> key.
        5 Click the green OK check mark.

 Tip
 Once in place, a datum symbol can be repositioned by clicking and dragging the symbol.




Defining a Perpendicular Tolerance
Define the right vertical edge of the part as datum B and perpendicular to datum A within a
tolerance of .001.
        1 Click the Annotation tab and click the Datum Feature tool and define the right
          vertical surface as datum B using the same procedure as used to define datum A.
        2 Click the Annotation tab and click the Geometric Tolerance tool.
See Figure 8-68. The Properties/Geometric Tolerance dialog box will appear.
  3 Locate the Geometric Tolerance.
  4 Click the No Leader option.
  5 Select the Perpendicular symbol from the popup box.
  6 Enter the Tolerance and click Add Datum in the next popup box.
  7 Enter datum A and click Done in the next popup box.
  8 Locate the geometric symbol on the extension line as shown.
  9 Click the green OK check mark.
Figure 8-68


Defining a Straightness Value for Datum Surface A
The surface finish value of 16 defines the smoothness of the surface but not the straightness.
Think of surface finish as waves, and straightness as an angle. A straightness value of .002
indicates that there is a band of width .002 located .001 on either side of a theoretically perfectly
straight line. The surface may vary but must always be within the .002 boundary. See Figure 8-
69.
       1 Click the Annotation tab and select the Geometric Tolerance tool.
       2 Locate the Geometric Tolerance.
       3 Click the No Leader option.
       4 Select the Straightness symbol from the popup box, and define the tolerance as .002 in
         the next popup box.
       5 Click Done.
       6 Locate the symbol under the datum A symbol as shown.
7 Click the green OK check mark.
Figure 8-69

8-34 Tolerances of Orientation
Tolerances of orientation are used to relate a feature or surface to another feature or surface.
Tolerances of orientation include perpendicularity, parallelism, and angularity. They may be
applied using RFS or MMC conditions, but they cannot be applied to individual features by
themselves. To define a surface as parallel to another surface is very much like assigning a
flatness value to the surface. The difference is that flatness applies only within the surface; every
point on the surface is related to a defined set of limiting parallel planes. Parallelism defines
every point in the surface relative to another surface. The two surfaces are therefore directly
related to each other, and the condition of one affects the other.
     Orientation tolerances are used with locational tolerances. A feature is first located, then it is
oriented within the locational tolerances. This means that the orientation tolerance must always
be less than the locational tolerances. The next four sections will further explain this
requirement.

8-35 Perpendicularity
Perpendicularity tolerances are used to limit the amount of variation for a surface or feature
within two planes perpendicular to a specified datum. Figure 8-70 shows a rectangular object.
The bottom surface is assigned as datum A, and the right vertical edge is toleranced so that it
must be perpendicular within a limit of 0.05 to datum A. The perpendicularity tolerance defines a
tolerance zone 0.05 wide between two parallel planes that are perpendicular to datum A.




Figure 8-70

     The object also includes a horizontal dimension and tolerance of 40 ± 1. This tolerance is
called a locational tolerance because it serves to locate the right edge of the object. As with
rectangular coordinate tolerances, discussed earlier in the chapter, the 40 ± 1 controls the
location of the edge—how far away or how close it can be to the left edge—but does not directly
control the shape of the edge. Any shape that falls within the specified tolerance range is
acceptable. This may in fact be sufficient for a given design, but if a more controlled shape is
required, a perpendicularity tolerance must be added. The perpendicularity tolerance works
within the locational tolerance to ensure that the edge is not only within the locational tolerance
but also perpendicular to datum A.
     Figure 8-70 shows the two extreme conditions for the 40 ± 1 locational tolerance. The
perpendicularity tolerance is applied by first measuring the surface and determining its maximum
and minimum lengths. The difference between these two measurements must be less than 0.05.
Thus, if the measured maximum distance is 41, then no other part of the surface may be less than
41 − 0.05 = 40.95.
     Tolerances of perpendicularity serve to complement locational tolerances, to make the shape
more exact, so tolerances of perpendicularity must always be smaller than tolerances of location.
It would be of little use, for example, to assign a perpendicularity tolerance of 1.5 for the object
shown in Figure 8-71. The locational tolerance would prevent the variation from ever reaching
the limits specified by such a large perpendicularity tolerance.




Figure 8-71

     Figure 8-72 shows a perpendicularity tolerance applied to cylindrical features: a shaft and a
hole. The figure includes examples of both RFS and MMC applications. As with straightness
tolerances applied at MMC, perpendicularity tolerances applied about a hole or shaft’s centerline
allow the tolerance zone to vary as the feature size varies.
Figure 8-72

     The inclusion of the Ø symbol in a geometric tolerance is critical to its interpretation. See
Figure 8-73. If the Ø symbol is not included, the tolerance applies only to the view in which it is
written. This means that the tolerance zone is shaped like a rectangular slice, not a cylinder, as
would be the case if the Ø symbol were included. In general it is better to always include the Ø
symbol for cylindrical features because it generates a tolerance zone more like that used in
positional tolerancing.
Figure 8-73

   Figure 8-73 shows a perpendicularity tolerance applied to a slot, a noncylindrical feature.
Again, the MMC specification is always for variations in the tolerance zone.

8-36 Parallelism
Parallelism tolerances are used to ensure that all points within a plane are within two parallel
planes that are parallel to a referenced datum plane. Figure 8-74 shows a rectangular object that
is toleranced so that its top surface is parallel to the bottom surface within 0.02. This means that
every point on the top surface must be within a set of parallel planes 0.02 apart. These parallel
tolerancing planes are located by determining the maximum and minimum distances from the
datum surface. The difference between the maximum and minimum values may not exceed the
stated 0.02 tolerance.
     In the extreme condition of maximum feature size, the top surface is located 40.5 above the
datum plane. The parallelism tolerance is then applied, meaning that no point on the surface may
be closer than 40.3 to the datum. This is an RFS condition. The MMC condition may also be
applied, thereby allowing the tolerance zone to vary as the feature size varies.
Figure 8-74

8-37 Angularity
Angularity tolerances are used to limit the variance of surfaces and axes that are at an angle
relative to a datum. Angularity tolerances are applied like perpendicularity and parallelism
tolerances as a way to better control the shape of locational tolerances.
     Figure 8-75 shows an angularity tolerance and several ways it is interpreted at extreme
conditions.
Figure 8-75

8-38 Profiles
Profile tolerances are used to limit the variations of irregular surfaces. They may be assigned as
either bilateral or unilateral tolerances. There are two types of profile tolerances: surface and
line. Surface profile tolerances limit the variation of an entire surface, whereas a line profile
tolerance limits the variations along a single line across a surface.
     Figure 8-76 shows an object that includes a surface profile tolerance referenced to an
irregular surface. The tolerance is considered a bilateral tolerance because no other specification
is given. This means that all points on the surface must be located between two parallel planes
0.08 apart that are centered about the irregular surface. The measurements are taken
perpendicular to the surface.
Figure 8-76

     Unilateral applications of surface profile tolerances must be indicated on the drawing using
phantom lines. The phantom line indicates the side of the true profile line of the irregular surface
on which the tolerance is to be applied. A phantom line above the irregular surface indicates that
the tolerance is to be applied using the true profile line as 0, and then the specified tolerance
range is to be added above that line. See Figures 8-77 and 8-78.
Figure 8-77
Figure 8-78

     Profiles of line tolerances are applied to irregular surfaces, as shown in Figure 8-78. Profiles
of line tolerances are particularly helpful when tolerancing an irregular surface that is constantly
changing, such as the surface of an airplane wing.
     Surface and line profile tolerances are somewhat analogous to flatness and straightness
tolerances. Flatness and surface profile tolerances are applied across an entire surface, whereas
straightness and line profile tolerances are applied only along a single line across the surface.

8-39 Runouts
A runout tolerance is used to limit the variations between features of an object and a datum.
More specifically, they are applied to surfaces around a datum axis such as a cylinder or to a
surface constructed perpendicular to a datum axis. There are two types of runout tolerances:
circular and total.
     Figure 8-79 shows a cylinder that includes a circular runout tolerance. The runout
requirements are checked by rotating the object about its longitudinal axis or datum axis while
holding an indicator gauge in a fixed position on the object’s surface.
Figure 8-79

     Runout tolerances may be either bilateral or unilateral. A runout tolerance is assumed to be
bilateral unless otherwise indicated. If a runout tolerance is to be unilateral, a phantom line is
used to indicate the side of the object’s true surface to which the tolerance is to be applied. See
Figure 8-80.
Figure 8-80

     Runout tolerances may be applied to tapered areas of cylindrical objects, as shown in Figure
8-81. The tolerance is checked by rotating the object about a datum axis while holding an
indicator gauge in place.
Figure 8-81

     A total runout tolerance limits the variation across an entire surface. See Figure 8-82. An
indicator gauge is not held in place while the object is rotated, as it is for circular runout
tolerances, but is moved about the rotating surface.
Figure 8-82

    Figure 8-83 shows a circular runout tolerance that references two datums. The two datums
serve as one datum. The object can then be rotated about both datums simultaneously as the
runout tolerances are checked.
Figure 8-83

8-40 Positional Tolerances
As defined earlier, positional tolerances are used to locate and tolerance holes. Positional
tolerances create a circular tolerance zone for hole centerpoint locations, in contrast with the
rectangular tolerance zone created by linear coordinate dimensions. See Figure 8-84. The circular
tolerance zone allows for an increase in acceptable tolerance variation without compromising the
design integrity of the object.
Figure 8-84

     Note how some of the possible hole centerpoints fall in an area outside the rectangular
tolerance zone but are still within the circular tolerance zone. If the hole had been located using
linear coordinate dimensions, centerpoints located beyond the rectangular tolerance zone would
have been rejected as beyond tolerance, and yet holes produced using these locations would
function correctly from a design standpoint. The centerpoint locations would be acceptable if
positional tolerances had been specified. The finished hole is round, so a round tolerance zone is
appropriate. The rectangular tolerance zone rejects some holes unnecessarily.
     Holes are dimensioned and toleranced using geometric tolerances by a combination of
locating dimensions, feature dimensions and tolerances, and positional tolerances. See Figure 8-
85. The locating dimensions are enclosed in rectangular boxes and are called basic dimensions.
Basic dimensions are assumed to be exact.
Figure 8-85

    The feature tolerances for the hole are as presented earlier in the chapter. They can be
presented using plus or minus or limit-type tolerances. In the example shown in Figure 8-85 the
diameter of the hole is toleranced using a plus and minus 0.05 tolerance.
    The basic locating dimensions of 45 and 50 are assumed to be exact. The tolerances that
would normally accompany linear locational dimensions are replaced by the positional tolerance.
The positional tolerance also specifies that the tolerance be applied at the centerline at maximum
material condition. The resulting tolerance zones are as shown in Figure 8-85.
    Figure 8-86 shows an object containing two holes that are dimensioned and toleranced using
positional tolerances. There are two consecutive horizontal basic dimensions. Because basic
dimensions are exact, they do not have tolerances that accumulate; that is, there is no tolerance
buildup.
Figure 8-86

8-41 Creating Positional Tolerances
Figure 8-87 shows an orthographic view that has been dimensioned. Note that the hole has a
dimension and tolerance of Ø1.000 ± .001. This is the hole’s feature tolerance. It deals only
with the hole’s diameter variation. It does not tolerance the hole’s location.


Creating the Positional Tolerance
      1 Click the Annotation tab and click the Geometric Tolerance tool.
      2 Locate the Geometric Tolerance.
      3 Click the No Leader option.
      4 Select the Position symbol from the popup box, define the tolerance as .001, and select
        the Diameter symbol in the next popup box.
      5 Select Material Condition and select the Maximum Material Condition symbol.
      6 Click Done.
    The collective symbol would read “Apply a .001 positional tolerance about the hole’s
centerpoint at the maximum material condition.”
      7 Click the green OK check mark.
      8 Locate the symbol on the drawing under the feature tolerance as shown.
Figure 8-87

   Create basic dimensions to accompany the geometric positional tolerance. See Figure 8-88.
Figure 8-88

        9 Click the 2.00 dimension.
    The Dimension PropertyManager will appear.
       10 Click the Basic option in the Tolerance/Precision box.
       11 Click the 1.13 dimension and make it a Basic dimension.
       12 Click the 1.00 dimension and make it a Basic dimension.
       13 Click the green OK check mark.
       14 Save the drawing.

 Tip
 Geometric positional tolerances must include basic dimensions. Basic dimensions are assumed to be perfect. The locational
 tolerance associated with locating dimensions has been moved to the geometric positional tolerance.




8-42 Virtual Condition
Virtual condition is a combination of a feature’s MMC and its geometric tolerance. For external
features (shafts) it is the MMC plus the geometric tolerance; for internal features (holes) it is the
MMC minus the geometric tolerance.
     The following calculations are based on the dimensions shown in Figure 8-89.
Figure 8-89


Calculating the Virtual Condition for a Shaft
      25.5 MMC for shaft—maximum diameter
     +0.3 Geometric tolerance
     ¯25.8
      ¯¯¯¯¯¯ Virtual condition


Calculating the Virtual Condition for a Hole
      24.5 MMC for hole—minimum diameter
     −0.3 Geometric tolerance
     ¯24.2
      ¯¯¯¯¯¯ Virtual condition


8-43 Floating Fasteners
Positional tolerances are particularly helpful when dimensioning mating parts. Because basic
locating dimensions are considered exact, the sizing of mating parts is dependent only on the
hole and shaft’s MMC and the geometric tolerance between them.
    The relationship for floating fasteners and holes in objects may be expressed as a formula:
                                          H−T = F
where
      H = hole at MMC
      T = geometric tolerance
      F = shaft at MMC
     A floating fastener is one that passes through two or more objects, and all parts have
clearance holes for the tolerance. It is not attached to either object and it does not screw into
either object. Figure 8-90 shows two objects that are to be joined by a common floating shaft,
such as a bolt or screw. The feature size and tolerance and the positional geometric tolerance are
both given. The minimum size hole that will always just fit is determined using the preceding
formula:
                                         H−T = F
                                     11.97 − .02 = 11.95
Figure 8-90

    Therefore, the shaft’s diameter at MMC, the shaft’s maximum diameter, equals 11.95. Any
required tolerance would have to be subtracted from this shaft size.
    The .02 geometric tolerance is applied at the hole’s MMC, so as the hole’s size expands
within its feature tolerance, the tolerance zone for the acceptable matching parts also expands.

8-44 Sample Problem SP8-3
The situation presented in Figure 8-90 can be worked in reverse; that is, hole sizes can be derived
from given shaft sizes.
     The two objects shown in Figure 8-91 are to be joined by a .250in. bolt. The parts are
floating; they are both free to move, and the fastener is not joined to either object. What is the
MMC of the holes if the positional tolerance is to be .030?
Figure 8-91

    A manufacturer’s catalog specifies that the tolerance for .250 bolts is .2500 to .2600.
    Rewriting the formula
                                           H−T = F
to isolate the H yields
                                       H = F+T
                                         = .260 + .030
                                         = .290
    The .290 value represents the minimum hole diameter, MMC, for all four holes that will
always accept the .250 bolt. Figure 8-92 shows the resulting drawing callout.
Figure 8-92

    Any clearance requirements or tolerances for the hole would have to be added to the .290
value.

8-45 Sample Problem SP8-4
Repeat the problem presented in SP8-3 but be sure that there is always a minimum clearance of
.002 between the hole and the shaft, and assign a hole tolerance of .008.
     Sample problem SP8-3 determined that the maximum hole diameter that will always accept
the .250 bolt is .290 based on the .030 positioning tolerance. If the minimum clearance is to be
.002, the maximum hole diameter is found as follows:
          .290 Minimum hole diameter that will always accept the bolt
                  (0 clearance at MMC)
       +.002 Minimum clearance
     ¯¯¯¯¯.292
           ¯¯¯¯¯¯ Minimum hole diameter including clearance

    Now, assign the tolerance to the hole:
          .292 Minimum hole diameter
       +.001 Tolerance
     ¯¯¯¯¯.293
          ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯ Maximum hole diameter

     See Figure 8-93 for the appropriate drawing callout. The choice of clearance size and hole
tolerance varies with the design requirements for the objects.




Figure 8-93

8-46 Fixed Fasteners
A fixed fastener is a fastener that is restrained in one of the parts. For example, one end of the
fastener is screwed into one of the parts using threads. See Figure 8-94. Because the fastener is
fixed to one of the objects, the geometric tolerance zone must be smaller than that used for
floating fasteners. The fixed fastener cannot move without moving the object it is attached to.
The relationship between fixed fasteners and holes in mating objects is defined by the formula
Figure 8-94
                                        H − 2T = F
     The tolerance zone is cut in half for each part. This can be demonstrated by the objects
shown in Figure 8-95. The same feature sizes that were used in Figure 8-91 are assigned, but in
this example the fasteners are fixed. Solving for the geometric tolerance yields a value as
follows:
                                            H− F     = 2T
                                    11.97 − 11.95    = 2T
                                              .02    = 2T
                                              .01    =T
Figure 8-95

    The resulting positional tolerance is half that obtained for floating fasteners.

8-47 Sample Problem SP8-5
This problem is similar to sample problem SP8-3, but the given conditions are applied to fixed
fasteners rather than floating fasteners. Compare the resulting shaft diameters for the two
problems. See Figure 8-96.
Figure 8-96

   A. What is the minimum diameter hole that will always accept the fixed fasteners?
   B. If the minimum clearance is .005 and the hole is to have a tolerance of .002, what are the
      maximum and minimum diameters of the hole?
              H − 2T = F
                   H = F + 2T
                     = .260 + 2 (0.030)
                     = .260 + 0.060
                     = .320 Minimum diameter that will always accept the fastener
If the minimum clearance is .005 and the hole tolerance is .002,
            .320 Virtual condition
         +.005 Clearance
       ¯¯¯¯¯.325
             ¯¯¯¯¯¯ Minimum hole diameter
            .325 Minimum hole diameter
         +.002 Tolerance
      ¯¯¯¯¯.327
           ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯ Maximum hole diameter

The maximum and minimum values for the hole’s diameter can then be added to the drawing of
the object that fits over the fixed fasteners. See Figure 8-97.




Figure 8-97

8-48 Design Problems
This problem was originally done in section “8-40, Positional Tolerances” using rectangular
tolerances. It is done in this section using positional geometric tolerances so that the two systems
can be compared. It is suggested that the previous problem be reviewed before reading this
section.
     Figure 8-98 shows top and bottom parts that are to be joined in the floating condition. A
nominal distance of 50 between hole centers and Ø20 for the holes has been assigned. In the
previous solution a rectangular tolerance of ±.01 was selected, and there was a minimum hole
diameter of 20.00. Figure 8-99 shows the resulting tolerance zones.




Figure 8-98
Figure 8-99

     The diagonal distance across the rectangular tolerance zone is .028 and was rounded off to
.03 to yield a maximum possible fastener diameter of 19.97. If the same .03 value is used to
calculate the fastener diameter using positional tolerance, the results are as follows:
                                          H−T = F
                                      20.00 − .03 = 19.97
     The results seem to be the same, but because of the circular shape of the positional tolerance
zone, the manufactured results are not the same. The minimum distance between the inside edges
of the rectangular zones is 49.98, or .01 from the centerpoint of each hole. The minimum
distance from the innermost points of the circular tolerance zones is 49.97, or .015 (half the
rounded-off .03 value) from the centerpoint of each hole.
     The same value difference also occurs for the maximum distance between centerpoints,
where 50.02 is the maximum distance for the rectangular tolerances, and 50.03 is the maximum
distance for the circular tolerances. The size of the circular tolerance zone is larger because the
hole tolerances are assigned at MMC. In this example the MMC for the hole is 20.00; that is,
when the hole is at its smallest. As the hole’s feature tolerance increases from 20.00 to 20.02, the
size of the tolerance zone increases.
     The basic dimensions of 20 and 50 are assumed to be perfect. The original ±.01 positional
tolerances assigned are still present; they are now presented as geometric positional tolerances.
The hole tolerance, 20 + .02/ − 0, is the feature tolerance, and the geometric tolerance of .03 is
the positional tolerance.
     Figure 8-99 shows a comparison between the tolerance zones, and Figure 8-100 shows how
the positional tolerances would be presented on a drawing of either the top or bottom part.
Figure 8-100

     Figure 8-101 shows the same top and bottom parts joined together in the fixed condition.
The initial nominal values are the same. If the same .03 diagonal value is assigned as a positional
tolerance, the results are as follows:
                                          H − 2T = F
                                      20.00 − .06 = 19.94
     These results appear to be the same as those generated by the rectangular tolerance zone, but
the circular tolerance zone allows a greater variance in acceptable manufactured parts.
Figure 8-101

   Figure 8-102 shows the parts dimensioned using baseline dimensions.
Figure 8-102

Chapter Projects

Project 8-1:
Draw a model of the objects shown in Figure P8-1A through P8-1D using the given dimensions
and tolerances. Create a drawing layout with a view of the model as shown. Add the specified
dimensions and tolerances.
Figure P8-1A
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-1B
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-1C
INCHES
Figure P8-1D
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-2:
Redraw the object shown in Figure P8-2, including the given dimensions and tolerances.
Calculate and list the maximum and minimum distances for surface A.
Figure P8-2
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-3
INCHES

Project 8-3:
   A. Redraw the object shown in Figure P8-3, including the dimensions and tolerances.
      Calculate and list the maximum and minimum distances for surface A.
   B. Redraw the given object and dimension it using baseline dimensions. Calculate and list
      the maximum and minimum distances for surface A.

Project 8-4:
Redraw the object shown in Figure P8-4, including the dimensions and tolerances. Calculate and
list the maximum and minimum distances for surfaces D and E.

Project 8-5:
Dimension the object shown in Figure P8-5 twice, once using chain dimensions and once using
baseline dimensions. Calculate and list the maximum and minimum distances for surface D for
both chain and baseline dimensions. Compare the results.
Figure P8-4
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-5
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-6:
Redraw the following shapes, as shown in Figure P8-6, including the dimensions and tolerances.
Also list the required minimum and maximum values for the specified distances.
Figure P8-6
INCHES

Project 8-7:
Redraw and complete the inspection report shown in Figure P8-7. Under the RESULTS column
classify each “AS MEASURED” value as OK if the value is within the stated tolerances,
REWORK if the value indicates that the measured value is beyond the stated tolerance but can
be reworked to bring it into the acceptable range, or SCRAP if the value is not within the
tolerance range and cannot be reworked to make it acceptable.
Figure P8-7
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-8:
Redraw the charts shown in Figure P8-8 and complete them based on the following information.
All values are in millimeters.
   A. Nominal = 16, Fit = H8/d8
   B. Nominal = 30, Fit = H11/c11
   C. Nominal = 22, Fit = H7/g6
   D. Nominal = 10, Fit = C11/h11
   E. Nominal = 25, Fit = F8/h7
   F. Nominal = 12, Fit = H7/k6
   G. Nominal = 3, Fit = H7/p6
   H. Nominal = 18, Fit = H7/s6
   I. Nominal = 27, Fit = H7/u6
   J. Nominal = 30, Fit = N7/h6




Figure P8-8
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-9:
Redraw the charts shown in Figure P8-9 and complete them based on the following information.
All values are in inches.
   A. Nominal = 0.25, Fit = Class LC 5, H7/g6
   B. Nominal = 1.00, Fit = Class LC 7, H10/e9
   C. Nominal = 1.50, Fit = Class LC 9, F11/h11
   D. Nominal = 0.75, Fit = Class RC 3, H7/f6
   E. Nominal = 1.75, Fit = Class RC 6, H9/e8
   F. Nominal = .500, Fit = Class LT 2, H8/js7
   G. Nominal = 1.25, Fit = Class LT 5, H7/n6
   H. Nominal = 1.38, Fit = Class LN 3, J7/h6
   I. Nominal = 1.625, Fit = Class FN 2, H7/s6
   J. Nominal = 2.00, Fit = Class FN 4, H7/u6




Figure P8-9
INCHES

Project 8-10:
Draw the chart shown and add the appropriate values based on the dimensions and tolerances
given in Figures P8-10A through P8-10D.
Figure P8-10A
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-10B
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-10C
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-10D
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-11:
Prepare front and top views of parts 4A and 4B in Figure P8-11 based on the given dimensions.
    Add tolerances to produce the stated clearances.

Project 8-12:
Redraw the Box, Top and Box, Bottom in Figure P8-12 and include dimensions and tolerances to
meet the “UPON ASSEMBLY” requirements.
Figure P8-11
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-12
INCHES

Project 8-13:
Draw a front and top view of both given objects in Figure P8-13. Add dimensions and tolerances
to meet the “FINAL CONDITION” requirements.

Project 8-14:
Given the following nominal sizes, dimension and tolerance parts AM311 and AM312 in Figure
P8-14 so that they always fit together regardless of orientation. Further, dimension the overall
lengths of each part so that in the assembled condition they will always pass through a clearance
gauge with an opening of 80.00 ± 0.02.
Figure P8-13
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-14
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-15:
Given the following rail assembly, as shown in Figure P8-15, add dimensions and tolerances so
that the parts always fit together as shown in the assembled position.
Figure P8-15
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-16:
Given the following peg assembly, shown in Figure P8-16, add dimensions and tolerances so that
the parts always fit together as shown in the assembled position.




Figure P8-16
INCHES
Project 8-17:
Given the following collar assembly shown in Figure P8-17, add dimensions and tolerances so
that the parts always fit together as shown in the assembled position.




Figure P8-17
MILLIMETERS

Project 8-18:
Given the following vee-block assembly shown in Figure P8-18, add dimensions and tolerances
so that the parts always fit together as shown in the assembled position. The total height of the
assembled blocks must be between 4.45 and 4.55in.
Figure P8-18
INCHES

Project 8-19:
Design a bracket that will support the three Ø100 wheels shown in Figure P8-19A. The wheels
will utilize three Ø5.00 ± 0.01 shafts attached to the bracket. The bottom of the bracket must be
a minimum of 10mm from the ground. The wall thickness of the bracket must always be at least
5mm, and the minimum bracket opening must be at least 15mm.
    1. Prepare a front and a side view of the bracket.
    2. Draw the wheels in their relative positions using phantom lines.
    3. Add all appropriate dimensions and tolerances.
Given a top and a bottom part in the floating condition as shown in Figure P8-19B, satisfy the
requirements given in projects P8-20 through P8-23 so that the parts always fit together
regardless of orientation. Prepare drawings of each part including dimensions and tolerances.
   A. Use linear tolerances.
   B. Use positional tolerances.
Figure P8-19A
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-19B

Project 8-20: Inches
  A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 2.00 nominal.
  B. The holes are Ø.375 nominal.
  C. The fasteners have a tolerance of .001.
  D. The holes have a tolerance of .002.
  E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is .003.
  F. The positional tolerance is .001.

Project 8-21: Millimeters
  A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 80 nominal.
  B. The holes are Ø12 nominal.
  C. The fasteners have a tolerance of 0.05.
   D. The holes have a tolerance of 0.03.
   E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is 0.02.
   F. The positional tolerance is .01.

Project 8-22: Inches
   A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 3.50 nominal.
   B. The holes are Ø.625 nominal.
   C. The fasteners have a tolerance of .005.
   D. The holes have a tolerance of .003.
   E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is .002.
   F. The positional tolerance is .002.

Project 8-23: Millimeters
   A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 65 nominal.
   B. The holes are Ø16 nominal.
   C. The fasteners have a tolerance of 0.03.
   D. The holes have a tolerance of 0.04.
   E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is 0.03.
   F. The positional tolerance is .02.
Given a top and a bottom part in the fixed condition as shown in Figure Figure P8-20, satisfy the
requirements given in projects P8-24 through P8-27 so that the parts fit together regardless of
orientation. Prepare drawings of each part including dimensions and tolerances.
   A. Use linear tolerances.
   B. Use positional tolerances.
Figure P8-20

Project 8-24: Millimeters
  A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 60 nominal.
  B. The holes are Ø10 nominal.
  C. The fasteners have a tolerance of 0.04.
  D. The holes have a tolerance of 0.02.
  E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is 0.02.
  F. The positional tolerance is 0.01.

Project 8-25: Inches
  A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 3.50 nominal.
  B. The holes are Ø.563 nominal.
  C. The fasteners have a tolerance of .005.
   D. The holes have a tolerance of .003.
   E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is .002.
   F. The positional tolerance is .001.

Project 8-26: Millimeters
   A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 100 nominal.
   B. The holes are Ø18 nominal.
   C. The fasteners have a tolerance of 0.02.
   D. The holes have a tolerance of 0.01.
   E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is 0.03.
   F. The positional tolerance is 0.02.

Project 8-27: Inches
   A. The distance between the holes’ centerpoints is 1.75 nominal.
   B. The holes are Ø.250 nominal.
   C. The fasteners have a tolerance of .002.
   D. The holes have a tolerance of .003.
   E. The minimum allowable clearance between the fasteners and the holes is .001.
   F. The positional tolerance is .002.

Project 8-28: Millimeters
Dimension and tolerance the rotator assembly shown in Figure P8-21. Use the given dimensions
as nominal and add sleeve bearings between the LINKs and both the CROSS-LINK and the
PLATE. Create drawings of each part. Modify the dimensions as needed and add the appropriate
tolerances. Specify the selected sleeve bearing.

Project 8-29: Millimeters
Dimension and tolerance the rocker assembly shown in Figure P8-22. Use the given dimensions
as nominal, and add sleeve bearings between all moving parts. Create drawings of each part.
Modify the dimensions as needed and add the appropriate tolerances. Specify the selected sleeve
bearing.

Project 8-30: Millimeters
Draw the model shown in Figure P8-23, create a drawing layout with the appropriate views, and
add the specified dimensions and tolerances.

Project 8-31: Millimeters
Redraw the shaft shown in Figure P8-24, create a drawing layout with the appropriate views, and
add a feature dimension and tolerance of 36 ± 0.1 and a straightness tolerance of 0.07 about the
centerline at MMC.




Figure P8-21
Figure P8-22
Figure P8-23
Figure P8-24

Project 8-32:
  A. Given the shaft shown in Figure P8-25, what is the minimum hole diameter that will
     always accept the shaft?
  B. If the minimum clearance between the shaft and a hole is equal to 0.02, and the tolerance
     on the hole is to be 0.6, what are the maximum and minimum diameters for the hole?

Project 8-33:
  A. Given the shaft shown in Figure P8-26, what is the minimum hole diameter that will
     always accept the shaft?
  B. If the minimum clearance between the shaft and a hole is equal to .005, and the tolerance
     on the hole is to be .007, what are the maximum and minimum diameters for the hole?

Project 8-34:
Draw a front and a right-side view of the object shown in Figure P8-27 and add the appropriate
dimensions and tolerances based on the following information. Numbers located next to an edge
line indicate the length of the edge.




Figure P8-25
Figure P8-26
Figure P8-27
Figure P8-28

   A. Define surfaces A, B, and C as primary, secondary, and tertiary datums, respectively.
   B. Assign a tolerance of ±0.5 to all linear dimensions.
   C. Assign a feature tolerance of 12.07 − 12.00 to the protruding shaft.
   D. Assign a flatness tolerance of 0.01 to surface A.
   E. Assign a straightness tolerance of 0.03 to the protruding shaft.
   F. Assign a perpendicularity tolerance to the centerline of the protruding shaft of 0.02 at
      MMC relative to datum A.

Project 8-35:
Draw a front and a right-side view of the object shown in Figure P8-28 and add the following
dimensions and tolerances.
   A. Define the bottom surface as datum A.
   B. Assign a perpendicularity tolerance of 0.4 to both sides of the slot relative to datum A.
   C. Assign a perpendicularity tolerance of 0.2 to the centerline of the 30 diameter hole at
      MMC relative to datum A.
   D. Assign a feature tolerance of ±0.8 to all three holes.
   E. Assign a parallelism tolerance of 0.2 to the common centerline between the two 20
      diameter holes relative to datum A.
   F. Assign a tolerance of ±0.5 to all linear dimensions.

Project 8-36:
Draw a circular front and the appropriate right-side view of the object shown in Figure P8-29 and
add the following dimensions and tolerances.




Figure P8-29
Figure P8-30

   A. Assign datum A as indicated.
   B. Assign the object’s longitudinal axis as datum B.
   C. Assign the object’s centerline through the slot as datum C.
   D. Assign a tolerance of ±0.5 to all linear tolerances.
   E. Assign a tolerance of ±0.5 to all circular features.
   F. Assign a parallelism tolerance of 0.01 to both edges of the slot.
   G. Assign a perpendicularity tolerance of 0.01 to the outside edge of the protruding shaft.

Project 8-37:
Given the two objects shown in Figure P8-30, draw a front and a side view of each. Assign a
tolerance of ±0.5 to all linear dimensions. Assign a feature tolerance of ±0.4 to the shaft, and
also assign a straightness tolerance of 0.2 to the shaft’s centerline at MMC.
     Tolerance the hole so that it will always accept the shaft with a minimum clearance of 0.1
and a feature tolerance of 0.2. Assign a perpendicularity tolerance of 0.05 to the centerline of the
hole at MMC.

Project 8-38:
Given the two objects shown in Figure P8-31, draw a front and a side view of each. Assign a
tolerance of ±.005 to all linear dimensions. Assign a feature tolerance of ±.004 to the shaft, and
also assign a straightness tolerance of .002 to the shaft’s centerline at MMC.
     Tolerance the hole so that it will always accept the shaft with a minimum clearance of .001
and a feature tolerance of .002.

Project 8-39:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-32, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.




Figure P8-31
Figure P8-32
Figure P8-33

   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is datum B and is perpendicular to datum A within 0.1mm.
   C. Surface 3 is datum C and is parallel to datum A within 0.3mm.
   D. Locate a 16mm diameter hole in the center of the front surface that goes completely
      through the object. Use positional tolerances to locate the hole. Assign a positional
      tolerance of 0.02 at MMC perpendicular to datum A.

Project 8-40:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-33, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is datum B and is perpendicular to datum A within .003in.
   C. Surface 3 is parallel to datum A within .005in.
   D. The cylinder’s longitudinal centerline is to be straight within .001in. at MMC.
   E. Surface 2 is to have circular accuracy within .002in.

Project 8-41:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-34, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.




Figure P8-34
Figure P8-35

   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 4 is datum B and is perpendicular to datum A within 0.08mm.
   C. Surface 3 is flat within 0.03mm.
   D. Surface 5 is parallel to datum A within 0.01mm.
   E. Surface 2 has a runout tolerance of 0.2mm relative to surface 4.
   F. Surface 1 is flat within 0.02mm.
   G. The longitudinal centerline is to be straight within 0.02 at MMC and perpendicular to
      datum A.

Project 8-42:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-35, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Surface 2 is datum A.
   B. Surface 6 is perpendicular to datum A with .000 allowable variance at MMC but with a
      .002in. MAX variance limit beyond MMC.
   C. Surface 1 is parallel to datum A within .005in.
   D. Surface 4 is perpendicular to datum A within .004in.

Project 8-43:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-36, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is datum B.
   C. The hole is located using a true position tolerance value of 0.13mm at MMC. The true
      position tolerance is referenced to datums A and B.
   D. Surface 1 is to be straight within 0.02mm.
   E. The bottom surface is to be parallel to datum A within 0.03mm.

Project 8-44:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-37, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is datum B.
   C. Surface 3 is perpendicular to surface 2 within 0.02mm.
   D. The four holes are to be located using a positional tolerance of 0.07mm at MMC
      referenced to datums A and B.
   E. The centerlines of the holes are to be straight within 0.01mm at MMC.
Figure P8-36
Figure P8-37

Project 8-45:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-38, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Surface 1 has a dimension of .378 − .375 in. and is datum A. The surface has a dual
      primary runout with datum B to within .005in. The runout is total.
   B. Surface 2 has a dimension of 1.505 − 1.495 in. Its runout relative to the dual primary
      datums A and B is .008in. The runout is total.
   C. Surface 3 has a dimension of 1.000 ± .005 and has no geometric tolerance.
   D. Surface 4 has no circular dimension but has a total runout tolerance of .006in. relative to
      the dual datums A and B.
   E. Surface 5 has a dimension of .500 − .495 in. and is datum B. It has a dual primary
      runout with datum A within .005in. The runout is total.

Project 8-46:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-39, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Hole 1 is datum A.
   B. Hole 2 is to have its circular centerline parallel to datum A within 0.2mm at MMC when
      datum A is at MMC.
   C. Assign a positional tolerance of 0.01 to each hole’s centerline at MMC.




Figure P8-38
Figure P8-39

Project 8-47:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-40, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is datum B.
   C. The six holes have a diameter range of .502 − .499 in. and are to be located using
      positional tolerances so that their centerlines are within .005in. at MMC relative to
      datums A and B.
   D. The back surface is to be parallel to datum A within .002in.

Project 8-48:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-41, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
  A. Surface 1 is datum A.
  B. Hole 2 is datum B.
  C. The eight holes labeled 3 have diameters of 8.4 − 8.3 mm with a positional tolerance of
     0.15mm at MMC relative to datums A and B. Also, the eight holes are to be counterbored
     to a diameter of 14.6 − 14.4 mm and to a depth of 5.0mm.
  D. The large center hole is to have a straightness tolerance of 0.2 at MMC about its
     centerline.




Figure P8-40
Figure P8-41

Project 8-49:
Draw a model of the object shown in Figure P8-42, then create a drawing layout including the
specified dimensions. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the drawing.
   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is datum B.
   C. Surface 3 is datum C.
   D. The four holes labeled 4 have a dimension and tolerance of 8 + 0.3/ − 0 mm. The holes
      are to be located using a positional tolerance of 0.05mm at MMC relative to datums A, B,
      and C.
   E. The six holes labeled 5 have a dimension and tolerance of 6 + 0.2/ − 0 mm. The holes
      are to be located using a positional tolerance of 0.01mm at MMC relative to datums A, B,
      and C.
Project 8-50:
The objects in Figure P8-43B labeled A and B are to be toleranced using four different tolerances
as shown. Redraw the charts shown in Figure P8-43A and list the appropriate allowable
tolerance for “as measured” increments of 0.1mm or .001in. Also include the appropriate
geometric tolerance drawing called out above each chart.
   A. Millimeters
   B. Inches




Figure P8-42
Figure P8-43A
Figure P8-43B

Project 8-51:
Assume that there are two copies of the part in Figure P8-44 and that these parts are to be joined
together using four fasteners in the floating condition. Draw front and top views of the object,
including dimensions and tolerances. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the
drawing, then draw front and top views of a shaft that can be used to join the two objects. The
shaft should be able to fit into any of the four holes.
   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is datum B.
   C. Surface 3 is perpendicular to surface 2 within 0.02mm.
   D. Specify the positional tolerance for the four holes applied at MMC.
   E. The centerlines of the holes are to be straight within 0.01mm at MMC.
   F. The clearance between the shafts and the holes is to be 0.05 minimum and 0.10
      maximum.
Project 8-52:
Dimension and tolerance parts 1 and 2 of Figure P8-45 so that part 1 always fits into part 2 with
a minimum clearance of .005in. The tolerance for part 1’s outer matching surface is .006in.




Figure P8-44
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-45

Project 8-53:
Dimension and tolerance parts 1 and 2 of Figure P8-46 so that part 1 always fits into part 2 with
a minimum clearance of 0.03mm. The tolerance for part 1’s diameter is 0.05mm. Take into
account the fact that the interface is long relative to the diameters.

Project 8-54:
Assume that there are two copies of the part in Figure P8-47 and that these parts are to be joined
together using six fasteners in the floating condition. Draw front and top views of the object,
including dimensions and tolerances. Add the following tolerances and specifications to the
drawing, then draw front and top views of a shaft that can be used to join the two objects. The
shaft should be able to fit into any of the six holes.
   A. Surface 1 is datum A.
   B. Surface 2 is round within .003.
  C. Specify the positional tolerance for the six holes applied at MMC.
  D. The clearance between the shafts and the holes is to be .001 minimum and .003
     maximum.




Figure P8-46
MILLIMETERS
Figure P8-47
INCHES

Project 8-55:
The assembly shown in Figure P8-48 is made from parts defined in Chapter 5.
   A. Draw an exploded assembly drawing.
   B. Draw a BOM.
   C. Use the drawing layout mode and draw orthographic views of each part. Include
      dimensions and geometric tolerances. The pegs should have a minimum clearance of
      0.02. Select appropriate tolerances.
Figure P8-48
MILLIMETERS
