About This eBook
ePUB is an open, industry-standard format for eBooks. However, support of ePUB and its many
features varies across reading devices and applications. Use your device or app settings to
customize the presentation to your liking. Settings that you can customize often include font, font
size, single or double column, landscape or portrait mode, and figures that you can click or tap to
enlarge. For additional information about the settings and features on your reading device or app,
visit the device manufacturer’s Web site.
Many titles include programming code or configuration examples. To optimize the presentation
of these elements, view the eBook in single-column, landscape mode and adjust the font size to
the smallest setting. In addition to presenting code and configurations in the reflowable text
format, we have included images of the code that mimic the presentation found in the print book;
therefore, where the reflowable format may compromise the presentation of the code listing, you
will see a “Click here to view code image” link. Click the link to view the print-fidelity code
image. To return to the previous page viewed, click the Back button on your device or app.
Engineering Design and Graphics with
         SolidWorks® 2023

            James D. Bethune
             Nathan Brown
Engineering Design and Graphics with SolidWorks® 2023
Copyright © 2023 by Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Peachpit Press. All rights
reserved. This publication is protected by copyright, and permission must be obtained from the
publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. For
information regarding permissions, request forms, and the appropriate contacts within the
Pearson Education Global Rights & Permissions Department, please visit
www.pearson.com/permissions. No patent liability is assumed with respect to the use of the
information contained herein. Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of
this book, the publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. Nor is any
liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.

Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with permission, in
this textbook appear on the appropriate page within the text. Unless otherwise stated, all artwork
has been provided by the author.

Images courtesy of Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corporation. SolidWorks® is a registered
trademark of Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corp. All rights reserved.

Trademarks
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been
appropriately capitalized. Que Publishing cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use
of a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service
mark.

Warning and Disclaimer
Every effort has been made to make this book as complete and as accurate as possible, but no
warranty or fitness is implied. The information provided is on an “as is” basis. The authors and
the publisher shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to
any loss or damages arising from the information contained in this book.

Special Sales
For information about buying this title in bulk quantities, or for special sales opportunities
(which may include electronic versions; custom cover designs; and content particular to your
business, training goals, marketing focus, or branding interests), please contact our corporate
sales department at corpsales@pearsoned.com or (800) 382-3419.

For government sales inquiries, please contact governmentsales@pearsoned.com.

For questions about sales outside the U.S., please contact intlcs@pearson.com.
Acquisitions Editor: Anshul Sharma
Senior Production Editor: Tonya Simpson
Cover Designer: Chuti Prasertsith
Developmental Editor: Patrice Rutledge
Full-Service Project Management: codeMantra
Composition: codeMantra
Proofreader: Jen Hinchliffe
Indexer: Timothy Wright

ScoutAutomatedPrintCode


Library of Congress Control Number: 2022951068

ISBN 10: 0-13-789952-1
ISBN 13: 978-0-13789952-4
Pearson’s Commitment to Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion

Pearson is dedicated to creating bias-free content that reflects the diversity of all learners. We
embrace the many dimensions of diversity, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender,
socioeconomic status, ability, age, sexual orientation, and religious or political beliefs.
Education is a powerful force for equity and change in our world. It has the potential to deliver
opportunities that improve lives and enable economic mobility. As we work with authors to
create content for every product and service, we acknowledge our responsibility to demonstrate
inclusivity and incorporate diverse scholarship so that everyone can achieve their potential
through learning. As the world’s leading learning company, we have a duty to help drive change
and live up to our purpose to help more people create a better life for themselves and to create a
better world.
     Our ambition is to purposefully contribute to a world where:
          Everyone has an equitable and lifelong opportunity to succeed through learning.
          Our educational products and services are inclusive and represent the rich diversity of
          learners.
          Our educational content accurately reflects the histories and experiences of the learners
          we serve.
          Our educational content prompts deeper discussions with learners and motivates them
          to expand their own learning (and worldview).
While we work hard to present unbiased content, we want to hear from you about any concerns
or needs with this Pearson product so that we can investigate and address them.
Please contact us with concerns about any potential bias at https://www.pearson.com/report-
bias.xhtml.
Preface

This book shows and explains how to use SolidWorks® 2023 to create engineering designs and
drawings. Emphasis is placed on creating engineering drawings including dimensions and
tolerances and using standard parts and tools. Each chapter contains step-by-step sample
problems that show how to apply the concepts presented in the chapter.
     The book contains hundreds of projects of various degrees of difficulty specifically designed
to reinforce the chapter’s content. The idea is that students learn best by doing. In response to
reviewers’ requests, some more difficult projects have been included.
     Chapters 1 and 2 show how to set up a part document and how to use the SolidWorks
Sketch tools. Sketch tools are used to create 2D part entities that can then be extruded into 3D
solid models. The chapters contain an explanation of how SolidWorks’ colors are used and of
how shapes can be fully defined. The usage of mouse gestures, S key, and origins is also
included. The two chapters include 44 exercise problems (18 in Ch1 and 26 in Ch2) using both
inches and millimeters so that students can practice applying the various Sketch tools.
     Chapter 3 shows how to use the Features tools. Features tools are used to create and
modify 3D solid models. In addition, reference planes are covered, and examples of how to edit
existing models are given.
     Chapter 4 explains how to create and interpret orthographic views. Views are created using
third-angle projection in compliance with ANSI standards and conventions. The differences
between first-angle and third-angle projections are demonstrated. Seven exercise problems (P4-
142 to P4-149) are included to help students learn to work with the two different standards. Also
included are section views, auxiliary views, and broken views. Several of the projects require
that a 3D solid model be drawn from a given set of orthographic views to help students develop
visualization skills.
     Chapter 5 explains how to create assembly drawings using the Assembly tools (Mate,
Exploded View) and how to document assemblies using the Drawing Documents tools. Topics
include assembled 3D solid models, exploded isometric drawings, and bills of materials (BOMs).
Assembly numbers and part numbers are discussed. Both the Animate Collapse/Explode and
Motion Study tools are demonstrated. In addition, the title, release, and revision blocks are
discussed. An explanation of how to use Interference Detection is given.
     Chapter 6 shows how to create and design with threads and fasteners. Both ANSI inch and
ANSI metric threads are covered. The Design Library is presented, and examples are used to
show how to select and size screws and other fasteners for assembled parts.
     Chapter 7 covers dimensioning and is in compliance with ANSI standards and conventions.
There are extensive visual examples of dimensioned shapes and features that serve as references
for various dimensioning applications.
     Chapter 8 covers tolerances. Both linear and geometric tolerances are included. This is
often a difficult topic to understand, so there are many examples of how to apply and how to
interpret the various types of tolerances. Standard tolerances as presented in the title block are
demonstrated.
     Chapter 9 explains bearings and fit tolerances. The Design Library is used to create
bearing drawings, and examples show how to select the correct interference tolerance between
bearings and housing, and clearance tolerances between bearings and shafts.
     Chapter 10 presents gears. Gear terminology, gear formulas, gear ratios, and gear creation
using the SolidWorks Toolbox are covered. The chapter relies heavily on the Design Library.
Keys, keyways, and set screws are discussed. Both English and metric units are covered. There is
an extensive sample problem that shows how to draw a support plate for mating gears and how
to create an assembly drawing for gear trains. The projects at the end of the chapter include two
large gear assembly exercises.
     Chapter 11 will help students prepare for the CSWA certification exam. There are many
sample questions and examples. Students should time how long it takes them to do each
problem. This will help them get used to working under time pressure.
     The Appendix includes fit tables for use with projects in the text. Clearance, locational, and
interference fits are included for both inch and millimeter values.

Download Instructor Resources from the Instructor Resource
Center
Instructor materials are available from Pearson’s Instructor Resource Center. Go to
https://www.pearson.com/en-us/highered-educators.xhtml to register, or to sign in if you already
have an account.

Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge the reviewers of this text: Peggy Condon-Vance, Penn State Berks;
Lisa Richter, Macomb Community College; Julie Korfhage, Clackamas Community College;
Max P. Gassman, Iowa State University; Paul E. Lienard, Northeastern University; and Hossein
Hemati, Mira Costa College.
    Thanks to my family—David, Maria, Randy, Sandra, Hannah, Will, Madison, Jack, Luke,
Sam, and Ben.
    A special thanks to Cheryl.
                                                                                James D. Bethune
    I would like to acknowledge the editors of this edition: Anshul Sharma, Patrice Rutledge,
and Tonya Simpson. Thanks to my family: Amanda, Jovie, and Iris. And thanks to my mentor:
Gina Bertocci.
                                                                                    Nathan Brown
Contents

  Preface

  CHAPTER 1 Getting Started

       Chapter Objectives
       1-1 Introduction
       1-2 Starting a New Document
                   Starting a New Part Document
                   Selecting a Sketch Plane
       1-3 SolidWorks Colors
       1-4 Creating a Fully Defined Circle
                   Changing an Existing Dimension
                   Fully Defined Entities
       1-5 Units
                   Changing Units
       1-6 Rectangle
                   Sketching a Rectangle
                   Exiting the Sketch Mode
                   Reentering the Sketch Mode
       1-7 Moving Around the Drawing Screen
                   Zooming the Rectangle
                   Moving the Rectangle
                   Reorientating the Rectangle
       1-8 Orientation
                   Returning to the Top View Orientation—View Selector
                   Returning to the Top View Orientation—Top View
                   Returning to the Top View Orientation—Orientation Triad
       1-9 Sample Problem SP1-1
                   Fixing a Line in Place
                  Sketch Relations
    1-10 Creating 3D Models
                  Creating a 3D Model
    1-11 Saving Documents
                  Saving a Document
    1-12 Sample Problem SP1-2
    1-13 Holes
                  Creating a Hole
    Chapter Project

CHAPTER 2 Sketch Entities and Tools

    Chapter Objectives
    2-1 Introduction
    2-2 Mouse Gestures and the S Key
                  Mouse Gestures
                  Using Mouse Gestures
                  Accessing Mouse Gestures Settings
                  Adding a Tool to a Mouse Gestures Wheel
                  S Key
                  Activating the S Key
                  Customizing the S Key Shortcut Toolbar
                  Removing a Tool from the S Key Toolbar
    2-3 Origins
                  Showing the Origin
    2-4 Circle
                  Sketching a Circle
                  Sketching a Perimeter Circle Using Three Points
                  Sketching a Perimeter Circle Tangent to Three Lines
    2-5 Rectangle
                  Sketching a Center Rectangle
                  Sketching a 3 Point Corner Rectangle
                  Sketching a 3 Point Center Rectangle
                  Sketching a Parallelogram
2-6 Slots
              Sketching a Straight Slot
              Sketching a Centerpoint Straight Slot
              Sketching a 3 Point Arc Slot
              Sketching a Centerpoint Arc Slot
2-7 Perimeter Circle
              Sketching a Perimeter Circle
2-8 Arcs
              Sketching a Centerpoint Arc
              Sketching a Tangent Arc
              Sketching a 3 Point Arc
2-9 Polygons
              Sketching a Hexagon
2-10 Spline
              Sketching a Spline
              Editing a Spline
2-11 Ellipse
              Sketching an Ellipse
              Sketching a Partial Ellipse
              Sketching a Parabola
              Conic Section
              Sketching a Conic
2-12 Fillets and Chamfers
              Sketching a Fillet
              Sketching a Chamfer
              Sketching a Chamfer Using Distance-Distance—Equal Distance
              Sketching a Chamfer Using Angle-Distance
              Sketching a Chamfer Using Distance-Distance—Not Equal Distance
2-13 Sketch Text
              Adding Text
              Changing the Font and Size of Text
              Adding Text to a Feature
              Creating Text that Wraps Around Two Features
2-14 Point
2-15 Trim Entities
             Trimming Entities
2-16 Extend Entities
             Extending Entities in a Sketch
2-17 Offset Entities
             Sketching an Offset Line
2-18 Mirror Entities
             Creating a Mirror Entity
2-19 Linear Sketch Pattern
             Creating a Linear Sketch Pattern
2-20 Circular Sketch Pattern
             Creating a Circular Sketch Pattern
2-21 Move Entities
             Moving an Entity
2-22 Copy Entities
             Copying an Entity
2-23 Rotate Entities
             Rotating an Entity
2-24 Scale Entities
             Scaling an Entity
2-25 Stretch Entities
             Stretching an Entity
2-26 Split Entities
             Splitting an Entity
2-27 Jog Lines
             Using the Jog Line Tool
2-28 Centerline
             Using the Centerline Tool
2-29 Sample Problem SP2-1
2-30 Sample Problem SP2-2
2-31 Sample Problem SP2-3
Chapter Projects
CHAPTER 3 Features

    Chapter Objectives
    3-1 Introduction
    3-2 Extruded Boss/Base
                 Using the Extruded Boss/Base Tool
                 Creating Inward Draft Sides
                 Creating an Outward Draft
    3-3 Sample Problem SP3-1
    3-4 Extruded Cut
    3-5 Hole Wizard
    3-6 Creating a Hole with the Circle and Extruded Cut Tools
    3-7 Blind Holes
                 Creating a Blind Hole—Inches
                 Creating a Blind Hole—Metric
    3-8 Fillet
                 Creating a Fillet with a Variable Radius
                 Creating a Fillet Using the Face Fillet Option
                 Creating a Fillet Using the Full Round Fillet Option
    3-9 Chamfer
                 Defining a Chamfer Using an Angle and a Distance
                 Defining a Chamfer Using Two Distances
                 Defining a Vertex Chamfer
    3-10 Revolved Boss/Base
    3-11 Revolved Cut
    3-12 Reference Planes
                 Creating a Reference Plane
    3-13 Lofted Boss/Base
    3-14 Shell
    3-15 Swept Boss/Base
    3-16 Draft
    3-17 Linear Sketch Pattern
    3-18 Circular Sketch Pattern
    3-19 Mirror
    3-20 Helix Curves and Springs
                Drawing a Helix
                Drawing a Spring From the Given Helix
    3-21 Compression Springs
                Creating Ground Ends
    3-22 Torsional Springs
                Drawing a Torsional Spring
    3-23 Extension Springs
                Drawing an Extension Spring
    3-24 Wrap
                Creating Debossed Text
    3-25 Editing Features
                Editing the Hole
                Editing the Cutout
    3-26 Sample Problem SP3-2
                Drawing a Cylinder
                Creating a Slanted Surface on the Cylinder
                Adding the Vertical Slot
                Adding the Ø8 Hole
    3-27 Sample Problem SP3-3
    3-28 Curve Driven Patterns
                Using the Curve Driven Pattern Tool—Example 1
                Using the Curve Driven Pattern Tool—Example 2
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 4 Orthographic Views

    Chapter Objectives
    4-1 Introduction
    4-2 Third- and First-Angle Projections
    4-3 Fundamentals of Orthographic Views
                Normal Surfaces
                Hidden Lines
               Precedence of Lines
               Slanted Surfaces
               Compound Lines
               Oblique Surfaces
               Rounded Surfaces
    4-4 Drawing Orthographic Views
               Moving Orthographic Views
               Creating Other Views
    4-5 Section Views
    4-6 Drawing a Section View
               Changing the Style of a Section View
    4-7 Aligned Section Views
    4-8 Broken Views
               Creating a Broken View
    4-9 Detail Views
               Drawing a Detail View
    4-10 Auxiliary Views
               Drawing an Auxiliary View
    4-11 First-Angle Projection
               Creating Three Orthographic Views Using First-Angle Projection
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 5 Assemblies
    Chapter Objectives
    5-1 Introduction
    5-2 Starting an Assembly
    5-3 Move Component
    5-4 Rotate Component
    5-5 Mouse Gestures for Assemblies
    5-6 Mate
               Creating the First Assembly Using Mates
               Creating a Second Assembly
               Creating a Third Assembly
    5-7 Bottom-up Assemblies
    5-8 Creating an Exploded Isometric Assembly
    5-9 Creating an Exploded Isometric Drawing
    5-10 Assembly Numbers
    5-11 Bill of Materials (BOM or Parts List)
               Editing the BOM
               Adding Columns to the BOM
               Changing the Width of a Column
               Changing the Width of Rows and Columns
               Changing the BOM’s Font
    5-12 Title Blocks
               Revision Letters
               Editing a Title Block
               Release Blocks
               Tolerance Blocks
               Application Blocks
    5-13 Animate Collapse
    5-14 Sample Problem SP5-1
    5-15 Using the Motion Study Tool
               Viewing the Assembly Motion
    5-16 Editing a Part Within an Assembly
    5-17 Interference Detection/Clearance Verification
               Interference Detection
               Detecting an Interference
               Verifying the Clearance
               Removing the Interference
               Verifying that a Clearance Exists
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 6 Threads and Fasteners

    Chapter Objectives
    6-1 Introduction
    6-2 Thread Terminology
                Pitch
    6-3 Thread Callouts—ANSI Metric Units
    6-4 Thread Callouts—ANSI Unified Screw Threads
    6-5 Thread Representations
    6-6 Internal Threads—Inches
    6-7 Threaded Blind Holes—Inches
    6-8 Internal Threads—Metric
    6-9 Accessing the Design Library
    6-10 Thread Pitch
    6-11 Determining an External Thread Length—Inches
    6-12 Smart Fasteners
    6-13 Determining an Internal Thread Length
    6-14 Set Screws
    6-15 Drawing a Threaded Hole in the Side of a Cylinder
    6-16 Adding Set Screws to the Collar
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 7 Dimensioning

    Chapter Objectives
    7-1 Introduction
    7-2 Terminology and Conventions—ANSI
                Common Terms
                Dimensioning Conventions
                Common Errors to Avoid
    7-3 Adding Dimensions to a Drawing
                Controlling Dimensions
                Dimensioning Short Distances
                Autodimension Tool
                Creating Baseline Dimensions
                Creating Ordinate Dimensions
    7-4 Drawing Scale
    7-5 Units
                Aligned Dimensions
               Hole Dimensions
    7-6 Dimensioning Holes and Fillets
               Dimensioning a Blind Hole
               Dimensioning Hole Patterns
    7-7 Dimensioning Counterbored and Countersunk Holes
               Counterbored Hole with Threads
               Dimensioning Countersink Holes
               Dimensioning the Block
    7-8 Angular Dimensions
               Dimensioning an Evenly Spaced Hole Pattern
    7-9 Ordinate Dimensions
               Creating Ordinate Dimensions
    7-10 Baseline Dimensions
               Creating Baseline Dimensions
               Hole Tables
    7-11 Locating Dimensions
    7-12 Fillets and Rounds
    7-13 Rounded Shapes—Internal
    7-14 Rounded Shapes—External
    7-15 Irregular Surfaces
    7-16 Polar Dimensions
    7-17 Chamfers
    7-18 Symbols and Abbreviations
    7-19 Symmetrical and Centerline Symbols
    7-20 Dimensioning to a Point
    7-21 Dimensioning Section Views
    7-22 Dimensioning Orthographic Views
               Dimensions Using Centerlines
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 8 Tolerancing

    Chapter Objectives
    8-1 Introduction
8-2 Direct Tolerance Methods
8-3 Tolerance Expressions
8-4 Understanding Plus and Minus Tolerances
8-5 Creating Plus and Minus Tolerances
           Adding Plus and Minus Symmetric Tolerances Using the Dimension
             Text Box
8-6 Creating Limit Tolerances
8-7 Creating Angular Tolerances
8-8 Standard Tolerances
8-9 Double-Dimensioning Errors
8-10 Chain Dimensions and Baseline Dimensions
           Baseline Dimensions
8-11 Tolerance Studies
           Calculating the Maximum Length of A
           Calculating the Minimum Length of A
8-12 Rectangular Dimensions
8-13 Hole Locations
8-14 Choosing a Shaft for a Toleranced Hole
           For Linear Dimensions and Tolerances
8-15 Sample Problem SP8-1
8-16 Sample Problem SP8-2
8-17 Nominal Sizes
8-18 Standard Fits (Metric Values)
           Clearance Fits
           Transitional Fits
           Interference Fits
8-19 Standard Fits (Inch Values)
           Adding a Fit Callout to a Drawing
           Reading Fit Tables
8-20 Preferred and Standard Sizes
8-21 Surface Finishes
8-22 Surface Control Symbols
8-23 Applying Surface Control Symbols
           Adding a Lay Symbol to a Drawing
8-24 Design Problems
           Floating Condition
           Fixed Condition
           Designing a Hole Given a Fastener Size
8-25 Geometric Tolerances
8-26 Tolerances of Form
8-27 Flatness
8-28 Straightness
8-29 Straightness (RFS and MMC)
8-30 Circularity
8-31 Cylindricity
8-32 Geometric Tolerances Using SolidWorks
8-33 Datums
           Adding a Datum Indicator
           Defining a Perpendicular Tolerance
           Defining a Straightness Value for Datum Surface A
8-34 Tolerances of Orientation
8-35 Perpendicularity
8-36 Parallelism
8-37 Angularity
8-38 Profiles
8-39 Runouts
8-40 Positional Tolerances
8-41 Creating Positional Tolerances
           Creating the Positional Tolerance
8-42 Virtual Condition
           Calculating the Virtual Condition for a Shaft
           Calculating the Virtual Condition for a Hole
8-43 Floating Fasteners
8-44 Sample Problem SP8-3
8-45 Sample Problem SP8-4
8-46 Fixed Fasteners
    8-47 Sample Problem SP8-5
    8-48 Design Problems
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 9 Bearings and Fit Tolerances

    Chapter Objectives
    9-1 Introduction
    9-2 Sleeve Bearings
               Drawing a Sleeve Bearing
               Using a Sleeve Bearing in an Assembly Drawing
    9-3 Bearings from the Toolbox
    9-4 Ball Bearings
    9-5 Fits and Tolerances for Bearings
    9-6 Fits—Inches
    9-7 Clearance Fits
    9-8 Hole Basis
    9-9 Shaft Basis
    9-10 Sample Problem SP9-1
    9-11 Interference Fits
    9-12 Manufactured Bearings
               Clearance for a Manufactured Bearing
               Applying a Clearance Fit Tolerance
               Interference for a Manufactured Bearing
               Applying an Interference Fit Tolerance
               Applying Standard Fit Tolerances to an Assembly Drawing
    9-13 Fit Tolerances—Millimeters
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 10 Gears
    Chapter Objectives
    10-1 Introduction
    10-2 Gear Terminology
    10-3 Gear Formulas
    10-4 Creating Gears
               Creating a Gear Assembly
               Animating the Gears
    10-5 Gear Ratios
    10-6 Gears and Bearings
               Adding Bearings
    10-7 Power Transmission—Shaft to Gear
    10-8 Set Screws and Gear Hubs
               Adding a Threaded Hole to the Gear’s Hub
    10-9 Keys, Keyseats, and Gears
               Defining and Creating Keyseats in Gears
               Returning to the Assembly Drawing
               Defining and Creating a Parallel Key
               Creating a Keyseat in the Shaft
               Creating the Keyseat
               Creating the Arc-Shaped End of a Keyseat
    10-10 Sample Problem SP10-1
               Determining the Pitch Diameter
               Editing the Bill of Materials
    10-11 Rack and Pinion Gears
               Animating the Rack and Pinion
    10-12 Metric Gears
               Creating a Metric Gear
    Chapter Projects

CHAPTER 11 CSWA Preparation
    Chapter Objectives
    11-1 Introduction
    11-2 Working with Cubes
               Problem 11-1
    11-3 Drawing Profiles
               Problem 11-2
               Problem 11-3
          Problem 11-4
          Problem 11-5
          Problem 11-6
11-4 Drawing Small 3D Objects
          Problem 11-7
          Problem 11-8
          Problem 11-9
          Problem 11-10
          Problem 11-11
          Problem 11-12
11-5 Drawing Larger Objects
          Problem 11-13
          Problem 11-14
          Problem 11-15
          Problem 11-16
          Problem 11-17
          Problem 11-18
          Problem 11-19
          Problem 11-20
11-6 Drawing Auxiliary Views
          Problem 11-21
          Problem 11-22
          Problem 11-23
11-7 Drawing Break Views
          Problem 11-24
          Problem 11-25
11-8 Drawing Section Views
          Problem 11-26
          Problem 11-27
          Problem 11-28
11-9 Drawing Detail Views
          Problem 11-29
          Problem 11-30
    11-10 Drawing Lines and Views
              Problem 11-31
              Problem 11-32
              Problem 11-33
    11-11 Creating Assemblies
              Problem 11-34
              Problem 11-35
    11-12 Problem Answers

APPENDIX

Index
Chapter 1. Getting Started
Chapter Objectives

          Create a sketch
          Create a file/part
          Create a solid model
          Edit angular and circular shapes
          Draw holes
          Use Sketch tools
          Change units of a part



1-1 Introduction
SolidWorks is a parametric solid modeler that uses dimensions, parameters, and relationships to
define and drive 3D shapes. Solid modelers make it easy to edit and modify parts as they are
constructed. This capability is ideal for creating new designs.
      Parametric modelers use dimensions to drive the shapes. For example, to create a line of a
defined length, a line is first sketched, and then the length dimension is added. The line will
assume the length of the dimension. If the dimension is changed, the length of the line will
change to match the new dimension.
      When using non-parametric modelers, a line is drawn and a dimension added. The
dimension will define the length of the existing line but not drive it. If the length of the line is
changed, the dimensions will not change. A new dimension is required to define the length of the
line.
      This chapter will show you how to start a New document and introduce the Line, Circle,
and Edit tools. The Smart Dimension tool will be used to define and edit lines and circles. Line
colors and relationships will also be introduced.

1-2 Starting a New Document
Figure 1-1 shows the initial SolidWorks screen.
Figure 1-1


Starting a New Part Document
      1 Click the New tool icon at the top of the SolidWorks screen.
    The New SolidWorks Document dialog box appears, as shown on the left in Figure 1-2.
This is the Novice version of the dialog box. Clicking Advanced opens the Advanced version,
shown on the right. Either version can be used to create three types of documents: Part,
Assembly, and Drawing.
Figure 1-2

       Parts are 3D solid models of individual parts.
       Assemblies are used to create combinations of parts and assemblies.
       Drawings are used to create orthographic views of a Part or Assembly. Dimensions and
       tolerances can be applied to Drawings.
      2 Click the Part tool and then click the OK box.
     The Part screen will appear. See Figure 1-3. Note the different areas of the screen. The
Sketch tab is currently activated, so the Features tools are displayed. Each tool icon on the
Sketch toolbar is accompanied by its name. These names can be removed and the toolbar
condensed to expand the size of the drawing screen. For clarity these named tools will be
included in the first few chapters of the book so you gain enough knowledge of the tools to work
without their names.
Figure 1-3


Selecting a Sketch Plane
SolidWorks uses one of three basic planes to define a part: Front, Top, and Right. These planes
correspond to the planes used to define orthographic views that will be explained in Chapter 4.
The Top plane will be used as a sketch plane to demonstrate the first few tools.
        1 Define the plane on which the part will be created by clicking the Top Plane option in
          the Feature manager box on the left side of the drawing screen.


 Note
 Instruction numbering in the text and figures does not necessarily match; however, the order will be similar. Steps numbered
 in the figures generally pertain to clicking items in the SolidWorks user interface, whereas the text may include additional
 numbered steps to guide the developmental process. The numbering in the figures will generally start anew in each new
 figure.


     See Figure 1-4. An outline of the Top plane will appear using a type of 3D orientation 5
called the Trimetric orientation.
Figure 1-4

      2 Click the Sketch tool as shown in Figure 1-4.
     The Top plane’s orientation will change to a 2D view. The Top plane is now a sketch plane
and appears as a rectangle because the view is taken perpendicular to the plane. This means that
all 2D shapes drawn on the plane will appear as true shapes.
      3 Click the Line tool.
          With the Line tool activated, locate the cursor on the origin. The origin is indicated by
          the two red arrows spaced 90° apart. See Figure 1-5.
Figure 1-5

     Two icons will appear on the screen: the Line tool icon indicating that the Line tool is
active, and the Coincident relation icon indicating that the origin and the starting point for the
line are on the same point.
       4 Move the cursor away from the origin horizontally to the right.
    As you move the cursor away from the origin, a distance and angle value will appear. See
Figure 1-6. The distance is as measured from the origin or starting point for the line, and the
angle is based on the SolidWorks definition of 0° as a horizontal line to the left of the starting
point. We are drawing to the right, so the angular value is 180°.
Figure 1-6

    Two other icons will also appear: the Line tool icon and the horizontal relationship icon.
      5 Click the mouse at the point at which you want to define the endpoint of the line.
      6 Move the cursor vertically downwards. Do not click the mouse.
     A new line will be drawn using the endpoint of the horizontal line as the starting point for
the vertical line. Distance and angle values will appear based on the new starting point, and the
Line and vertical relationship icons will appear.
      7 Press the <Esc> key or right-click the mouse and click the Select option.
      8 Click the Smart Dimension tool, click the line, and move the cursor away from the
        line.
          A dimension will appear.
      9 Click the mouse to define the location of the dimension.
    The Modify dialog box will appear.
     10 Enter a distance value for the line and click the green OK check mark.
     11 Click anywhere on the empty screen to complete the line.
    The dimension can be moved by locating the cursor on the dimension, pressing and holding
the mouse button, and dragging the cursor.
     12 Hover over the arrow next to the SolidWorks logo in the upper left and click the File
        menu located at the top of the screen, then click Close. See Figure 1-7.




Figure 1-7

     13 Click the Don’t Save option. See Figure 1-8.
Figure 1-8

    The screen will return to the original SolidWorks screen.

1-3 SolidWorks Colors
As you work with SolidWorks you will notice that the lines change colors. These color changes
let you know the status of the sketch being drawn. There are four basic colors.
     Black = Fully defined
     Blue = Under defined
     Red = Over defined
     Yellow = Redundant

1-4 Creating a Fully Defined Circle
In this section we will sketch a circle to help understand the difference between a fully defined
and an under defined Part.
      1 In the New SolidWorks dialog box (previously shown in Figure 1-2), click Part and
          then click OK to open a new Part document.
       2 Click the Top Plane on the left (as depicted in Figure 1-4).
       3 Click the Sketch tab. (It may already be activated.) See Figure 1-9.




Figure 1-9

       4 Click the Circle tool.
       5 Locate the cursor on the origin, click the mouse, and drag the cursor away from the
         origin centerpoint.
    Note that the Coincident relation symbol appears next to the origin, indicating that the
centerpoint of the circle is located on the origin.
       6 Click the mouse to define a sketch radius for the circle.
     This sketched radius is a temporary radius and is not the final radius. The circle will be blue,
indicating that it is not fully defined.
       7 Click the Smart Dimension tool on the Sketch panel.
       8 Click the circle and move the cursor away from the circle.
